<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      BOOK TWELVE: 1812
    </h2>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER I
    </h3>
<p>
      In Petersburg at that time a complicated struggle was being carried on
      with greater heat than ever in the highest circles, between the parties of
      Rumyántsev, the French, Márya Fëdorovna, the Tsarévich, and others,
      drowned as usual by the buzzing of the court drones. But the calm,
      luxurious life of Petersburg, concerned only about phantoms and
      reflections of real life, went on in its old way and made it hard, except
      by a great effort, to realize the danger and the difficult position of the
      Russian people. There were the same receptions and balls, the same French
      theater, the same court interests and service interests and intrigues as
      usual. Only in the very highest circles were attempts made to keep in mind
      the difficulties of the actual position. Stories were whispered of how
      differently the two Empresses behaved in these difficult circumstances.
      The Empress Márya, concerned for the welfare of the charitable and
      educational institutions under her patronage, had given directions that
      they should all be removed to Kazán, and the things belonging to these
      institutions had already been packed up. The Empress Elisabeth, however,
      when asked what instructions she would be pleased to give—with her
      characteristic Russian patriotism had replied that she could give no
      directions about state institutions for that was the affair of the
      sovereign, but as far as she personally was concerned she would be the
      last to quit Petersburg.
    </p>
<p>
      At Anna Pávlovna’s on the twenty-sixth of August, the very day of the
      battle of Borodinó, there was a soiree, the chief feature of which was to
      be the reading of a letter from His Lordship the Bishop when sending the
      Emperor an icon of the Venerable Sergius. It was regarded as a model of
      ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence. Prince Vasíli himself, famed for his
      elocution, was to read it. (He used to read at the Empress’.) The art of
      his reading was supposed to lie in rolling out the words, quite
      independently of their meaning, in a loud and singsong voice alternating
      between a despairing wail and a tender murmur, so that the wail fell quite
      at random on one word and the murmur on another. This reading, as was
      always the case at Anna Pávlovna’s soirees, had a political significance.
      That evening she expected several important personages who had to be made
      ashamed of their visits to the French theater and aroused to a patriotic
      temper. A good many people had already arrived, but Anna Pávlovna, not yet
      seeing all those whom she wanted in her drawing room, did not let the
      reading begin but wound up the springs of a general conversation.
    </p>
<p>
      The news of the day in Petersburg was the illness of Countess Bezúkhova.
      She had fallen ill unexpectedly a few days previously, had missed several
      gatherings of which she was usually the ornament, and was said to be receiving
      no one, and instead of the celebrated Petersburg doctors who usually
      attended her had entrusted herself to some Italian doctor who was treating
      her in some new and unusual way.
    </p>
<p>
      They all knew very well that the enchanting countess’ illness arose from
      an inconvenience resulting from marrying two husbands at the same time,
      and that the Italian’s cure consisted in removing such inconvenience; but
      in Anna Pávlovna’s presence no one dared to think of this or even appear
      to know it.
    </p>
<p>
      “They say the poor countess is very ill. The doctor says it is angina
      pectoris.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Angina? Oh, that’s a terrible illness!”
     </p>
<p>
      “They say that the rivals are reconciled, thanks to the angina...” and
      the word <i>angina</i> was repeated with great satisfaction.
    </p>
<p>
      “The count is pathetic, they say. He cried like a child when the doctor
      told him the case was dangerous.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an enchanting woman.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You are speaking of the poor countess?” said Anna Pávlovna, coming up
      just then. “I sent to ask for news, and hear that she is a little better.
      Oh, she is certainly the most charming woman in the world,” she went on,
      with a smile at her own enthusiasm. “We belong to different camps, but
      that does not prevent my esteeming her as she deserves. She is very
      unfortunate!” added Anna Pávlovna.
    </p>
<p>
      Supposing that by these words Anna Pávlovna was somewhat lifting the veil
      from the secret of the countess’ malady, an unwary young man ventured to
      express surprise that well-known doctors had not been called in and that
      the countess was being attended by a charlatan who might employ dangerous
      remedies.
    </p>
<p>
      “Your information may be better than mine,” Anna Pávlovna suddenly and
      venomously retorted on the inexperienced young man, “but I know on good
      authority that this doctor is a very learned and able man. He is private
      physician to the Queen of Spain.”
     </p>
<p>
      And having thus demolished the young man, Anna Pávlovna turned to another
      group where Bilíbin was talking about the Austrians: having wrinkled up
      his face he was evidently preparing to smooth it out again and utter one
      of his mots.
    </p>
<p>
      “I think it is delightful,” he said, referring to a diplomatic note that
      had been sent to Vienna with some Austrian banners captured from the
      French by Wittgenstein, “the hero of Petropol” as he was then called in
      Petersburg.
    </p>
<p>
      “What? What’s that?” asked Anna Pávlovna, securing silence for the mot,
      which she had heard before.
    </p>
<p>
      And Bilíbin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch, which he
      had himself composed.
    </p>
<p>
      “The Emperor returns these Austrian banners,” said Bilíbin, “friendly
      banners gone astray and found on a wrong path,” and his brow became smooth
      again.
    </p>
<p>
      “Charming, charming!” observed Prince Vasíli.
    </p>
<p>
      “The path to Warsaw, perhaps,” Prince Hippolyte remarked loudly and
      unexpectedly. Everybody looked at him, understanding what he meant. Prince
      Hippolyte himself glanced around with amused surprise. He knew no more
      than the others what his words meant. During his diplomatic career he had
      more than once noticed that such utterances were received as very witty,
      and at every opportunity he uttered in that way the first words that
      entered his head. “It may turn out very well,” he thought, “but if not,
      they’ll know how to arrange matters.” And really, during the awkward
      silence that ensued, that insufficiently patriotic person entered whom
      Anna Pávlovna had been waiting for and wished to convert, and she, smiling
      and shaking a finger at Hippolyte, invited Prince Vasíli to the table and
      bringing him two candles and the manuscript begged him to begin. Everyone
      became silent.
    </p>
<p>
      “Most Gracious Sovereign and Emperor!” Prince Vasíli sternly declaimed,
      looking round at his audience as if to inquire whether anyone had anything
      to say to the contrary. But no one said anything. “Moscow, our ancient
      capital, the New Jerusalem, receives <i>her</i> Christ”—he placed a sudden
      emphasis on the word <i>her</i>—“as a mother receives her zealous sons into
      her arms, and through the gathering mists, foreseeing the brilliant glory
      of thy rule, sings in exultation, ‘Hosanna, blessed is he that cometh!’”
     </p>
<p>
      Prince Vasíli pronounced these last words in a tearful voice.
    </p>
<p>
      Bilíbin attentively examined his nails, and many of those present appeared
      intimidated, as if asking in what they were to blame. Anna Pávlovna
      whispered the next words in advance, like an old woman muttering the
      prayer at Communion: “Let the bold and insolent Goliath...” she whispered.
    </p>
<p>
      Prince Vasíli continued.
    </p>
<p>
      “Let the bold and insolent Goliath from the borders of France encompass
      the realms of Russia with death-bearing terrors; humble Faith, the sling
      of the Russian David, shall suddenly smite his head in his bloodthirsty
      pride. This icon of the Venerable Sergius, the servant of God and zealous
      champion of old of our country’s weal, is offered to Your Imperial
      Majesty. I grieve that my waning strength prevents rejoicing in the sight
      of your most gracious presence. I raise fervent prayers to Heaven that the
      Almighty may exalt the race of the just, and mercifully fulfill the
      desires of Your Majesty.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What force! What a style!” was uttered in approval both of reader and of
      author.
    </p>
<p>
      Animated by that address Anna Pávlovna’s guests talked for a long time of
      the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures as to the
      result of the battle to be fought in a few days.
    </p>
<p>
      “You will see,” said Anna Pávlovna, “that tomorrow, on the Emperor’s
      birthday, we shall receive news. I have a favorable presentiment!”
     </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER II
    </h3>
<p>
      Anna Pávlovna’s presentiment was in fact fulfilled. Next day during the
      service at the palace church in honor of the Emperor’s birthday, Prince
      Volkónski was called out of the church and received a dispatch from Prince
      Kutúzov. It was Kutúzov’s report, written from Tatárinova on the day of
      the battle. Kutúzov wrote that the Russians had not retreated a step, that
      the French losses were much heavier than ours, and that he was writing in
      haste from the field of battle before collecting full information. It
      followed that there must have been a victory. And at once, without leaving
      the church, thanks were rendered to the Creator for His help and for the
      victory.
    </p>
<p>
      Anna Pávlovna’s presentiment was justified, and all that morning a
      joyously festive mood reigned in the city. Everyone believed the victory
      to have been complete, and some even spoke of Napoleon’s having been
      captured, of his deposition, and of the choice of a new ruler for France.
    </p>
<p>
      It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their real strength and
      completeness amid the conditions of court life and far from the scene of
      action. General events involuntarily group themselves around some
      particular incident. So now the courtiers’ pleasure was based as much on
      the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor’s birthday as on the
      fact of the victory itself. It was like a successfully arranged surprise.
      Mention was made in Kutúzov’s report of the Russian losses, among which
      figured the names of Túchkov, Bagratión, and Kutáysov. In the Petersburg
      world this sad side of the affair again involuntarily centered round a
      single incident: Kutáysov’s death. Everybody knew him, the Emperor liked
      him, and he was young and interesting. That day everyone met with the
      words:
    </p>
<p>
      “What a wonderful coincidence! Just during the service. But what a loss
      Kutáysov is! How sorry I am!”
     </p>
<p>
      “What did I tell about Kutúzov?” Prince Vasíli now said with a prophet’s
      pride. “I always said he was the only man capable of defeating Napoleon.”
     </p>
<p>
      But next day no news arrived from the army and the public mood grew
      anxious. The courtiers suffered because of the suffering the suspense
      occasioned the Emperor.
    </p>
<p>
      “Fancy the Emperor’s position!” said they, and instead of extolling
      Kutúzov as they had done the day before, they condemned him as the cause
      of the Emperor’s anxiety. That day Prince Vasíli no longer boasted of his
      protégé Kutúzov, but remained silent when the commander in chief was
      mentioned. Moreover, toward evening, as if everything conspired to make
      Petersburg society anxious and uneasy, a terrible piece of news was added.
      Countess Hélène Bezúkhova had suddenly died of that terrible malady it had
      been so agreeable to mention. Officially, at large gatherings, everyone
      said that Countess Bezúkhova had died of a terrible attack of angina
      pectoris, but in intimate circles details were mentioned of how the
      private physician of the Queen of Spain had prescribed small doses of a
      certain drug to produce a certain effect; but Hélène, tortured by the fact
      that the old count suspected her and that her husband to whom she had
      written (that wretched, profligate Pierre) had not replied, had suddenly
      taken a very large dose of the drug, and had died in agony before
      assistance could be rendered her. It was said that Prince Vasíli and the
      old count had turned upon the Italian, but the latter had produced such
      letters from the unfortunate deceased that they had immediately let the
      matter drop.
    </p>
<p>
      Talk in general centered round three melancholy facts: the Emperor’s lack
      of news, the loss of Kutáysov, and the death of Hélène.
    </p>
<p>
      On the third day after Kutúzov’s report a country gentleman arrived from
      Moscow, and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread through
      the whole town. This was terrible! What a position for the Emperor to be
      in! Kutúzov was a traitor, and Prince Vasíli during the visits of
      condolence paid to him on the occasion of his daughter’s death said of
      Kutúzov, whom he had formerly praised (it was excusable for him in his
      grief to forget what he had said), that it was impossible to expect
      anything else from a blind and depraved old man.
    </p>
<p>
      “I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrusted to such a
      man.”
     </p>
<p>
      As long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it, but
      the next day the following communication was received from Count
      Rostopchín:
    </p>
<p>
      Prince Kutúzov’s adjutant has brought me a letter in which he demands
      police officers to guide the army to the Ryazán road. He writes that he is
      regretfully abandoning Moscow. Sire! Kutúzov’s action decides the fate of
      the capital and of your empire! Russia will shudder to learn of the
      abandonment of the city in which her greatness is centered and in which
      lie the ashes of your ancestors! I shall follow the army. I have had
      everything removed, and it only remains for me to weep over the fate of my
      fatherland.
    </p>
<p>
      On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkónski to Kutúzov
      with the following rescript:
    </p>
<p>
      Prince Michael Ilariónovich! Since the twenty-ninth of August I have
      received no communication from you, yet on the first of September I
      received from the commander in chief of Moscow, via Yaroslávl, the sad
      news that you, with the army, have decided to abandon Moscow. You can
      yourself imagine the effect this news has had on me, and your silence
      increases my astonishment. I am sending this by Adjutant-General Prince
      Volkónski, to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasons that
      have induced you to take this melancholy decision.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER III
    </h3>
<p>
      Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow, a messenger from Kutúzov
      reached Petersburg with the official announcement of that event. This
      messenger was Michaud, a Frenchman who did not know Russian, but who was
      <i>quoique étranger, russe de cœur et d’âme,</i> * as he said of himself.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
    * Though a foreigner, Russian in heart and soul.
</pre>
<p>
      The Emperor at once received this messenger in his study at the palace on
      Stone Island. Michaud, who had never seen Moscow before the campaign and
      who did not know Russian, yet felt deeply moved (as he wrote) when he
      appeared before <i>notre très gracieux souverain</i> * with the news of the
      burning of Moscow, <i>dont les flammes éclairaient sa route</i>. *(2)
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     * Our most gracious sovereign.

     * (2) Whose flames illumined his route.
</pre>
<p>
      Though the source of M. Michaud’s chagrin must have been different from
      that which caused Russians to grieve, he had such a sad face when shown
      into the Emperor’s study that the latter at once asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Have you brought me sad news, Colonel?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Very sad, sire,” replied Michaud, lowering his eyes with a sigh. “The
      abandonment of Moscow.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle?” asked the
      Emperor quickly, his face suddenly flushing.
    </p>
<p>
      Michaud respectfully delivered the message Kutúzov had entrusted to him,
      which was that it had been impossible to fight before Moscow, and that as
      the only remaining choice was between losing the army as well as Moscow,
      or losing Moscow alone, the field marshal had to choose the latter.
    </p>
<p>
      The Emperor listened in silence, not looking at Michaud.
    </p>
<p>
      “Has the enemy entered the city?” he asked.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, sire, and Moscow is now in ashes. I left it all in flames,” replied
      Michaud in a decided tone, but glancing at the Emperor he was frightened
      by what he had done.
    </p>
<p>
      The Emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly, his lower lip trembled,
      and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      But this lasted only a moment. He suddenly frowned, as if blaming himself
      for his weakness, and raising his head addressed Michaud in a firm voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “I see, Colonel, from all that is happening, that Providence requires
      great sacrifices of us... I am ready to submit myself in all things to His
      will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you leave the army when it saw my
      ancient capital abandoned without a battle? Did you not notice
      discouragement?...”
     </p>
<p>
      Seeing that his most gracious ruler was calm once more, Michaud also grew
      calm, but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor’s direct and
      relevant question which required a direct answer.
    </p>
<p>
      “Sire, will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyal soldier?” he
      asked to gain time.
    </p>
<p>
      “Colonel, I always require it,” replied the Emperor. “Conceal nothing from
      me, I wish to know absolutely how things are.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Sire!” said Michaud with a subtle, scarcely perceptible smile on his
      lips, having now prepared a well-phrased reply, “sire, I left the whole
      army, from its chiefs to the lowest soldier, without exception in
      desperate and agonized terror...”
     </p>
<p>
      “How is that?” the Emperor interrupted him, frowning sternly. “Would
      misfortune make my Russians lose heart?... Never!”
     </p>
<p>
      Michaud had only waited for this to bring out the phrase he had prepared.
    </p>
<p>
      “Sire,” he said, with respectful playfulness, “they are only afraid lest
      Your Majesty, in the goodness of your heart, should allow yourself to be
      persuaded to make peace. They are burning for the combat,” declared this
      representative of the Russian nation, “and to prove to Your Majesty by the
      sacrifice of their lives how devoted they are....”
     </p>
<p>
      “Ah!” said the Emperor reassured, and with a kindly gleam in his eyes, he
      patted Michaud on the shoulder. “You set me at ease, Colonel.”
     </p>
<p>
      He bent his head and was silent for some time.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, then, go back to the army,” he said, drawing himself up to his full
      height and addressing Michaud with a gracious and majestic gesture, “and
      tell our brave men and all my good subjects wherever you go that when I
      have not a soldier left I shall put myself at the head of my beloved
      nobility and my good peasants and so use the last resources of my empire.
      It still offers me more than my enemies suppose,” said the Emperor growing
      more and more animated; “but should it ever be ordained by Divine
      Providence,” he continued, raising to heaven his fine eyes shining with
      emotion, “that my dynasty should cease to reign on the throne of my
      ancestors, then after exhausting all the means at my command, I shall let
      my beard grow to here” (he pointed halfway down his chest) “and go and eat
      potatoes with the meanest of my peasants, rather than sign the disgrace of
      my country and of my beloved people whose sacrifices I know how to
      appreciate.”
     </p>
<p>
      Having uttered these words in an agitated voice the Emperor suddenly
      turned away as if to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to his eyes,
      and went to the further end of his study. Having stood there a few
      moments, he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below the elbow
      with a vigorous movement. The Emperor’s mild and handsome face was flushed
      and his eyes gleamed with resolution and anger.
    </p>
<p>
      “Colonel Michaud, do not forget what I say to you here, perhaps we may
      recall it with pleasure someday... Napoleon or I,” said the Emperor,
      touching his breast. “We can no longer both reign together. I have learned
      to know him, and he will not deceive me any more....”
     </p>
<p>
      And the Emperor paused, with a frown.
    </p>
<p>
      When he heard these words and saw the expression of firm resolution in the
      Emperor’s eyes, Michaud—<i>quoique étranger, russe de cœur et
      d’âme,</i>—at that solemn moment felt himself enraptured by all that
      he had heard (as he used afterwards to say), and gave expression to his own
      feelings and those of the Russian people whose representative he considered
      himself to be, in the following words:
    </p>
<p>
      “Sire!” said he, “Your Majesty is at this moment signing the glory of the
      nation and the salvation of Europe!”
     </p>
<p>
      With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER IV
    </h3>
<p>
      It is natural for us who were not living in those days to imagine that
      when half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants were fleeing to
      distant provinces, and one levy after another was being raised for the
      defense of the fatherland, all Russians from the greatest to the least
      were solely engaged in sacrificing themselves, saving their fatherland, or
      weeping over its downfall. The tales and descriptions of that time without
      exception speak only of the self-sacrifice, patriotic devotion, despair,
      grief, and the heroism of the Russians. But it was not really so. It
      appears so to us because we see only the general historic interest of that
      time and do not see all the personal human interests that people had. Yet
      in reality those personal interests of the moment so much transcend the
      general interests that they always prevent the public interest from being
      felt or even noticed. Most of the people at that time paid no attention to
      the general progress of events but were guided only by their private
      interests, and they were the very people whose activities at that period
      were most useful.
    </p>
<p>
      Those who tried to understand the general course of events and to take
      part in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most useless members of
      society, they saw everything upside down, and all they did for the common
      good turned out to be useless and foolish—like Pierre’s and
      Mamónov’s regiments which looted Russian villages, and the lint the young
      ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded, and so on. Even those,
      fond of intellectual talk and of expressing their feelings, who discussed
      Russia’s position at the time involuntarily introduced into their
      conversation either a shade of pretense and falsehood or useless
      condemnation and anger directed against people accused of actions no one
      could possibly be guilty of. In historic events the rule forbidding us to
      eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge is specially applicable. Only
      unconscious action bears fruit, and he who plays a part in an historic
      event never understands its significance. If he tries to realize it his
      efforts are fruitless.
    </p>
<p>
      The more closely a man was engaged in the events then taking place in
      Russia the less did he realize their significance. In Petersburg and in
      the provinces at a distance from Moscow, ladies, and gentlemen in militia
      uniforms, wept for Russia and its ancient capital and talked of
      self-sacrifice and so on; but in the army which retired beyond Moscow
      there was little talk or thought of Moscow, and when they caught sight of
      its burned ruins no one swore to be avenged on the French, but they
      thought about their next pay, their next quarters, of Matrëshka the
      vivandière, and like matters.
    </p>
<p>
      As the war had caught him in the service, Nicholas Rostóv took a close and
      prolonged part in the defense of his country, but did so casually, without
      any aim at self-sacrifice, and he therefore looked at what was going on in
      Russia without despair and without dismally racking his brains over it.
      Had he been asked what he thought of the state of Russia, he would have
      said that it was not his business to think about it, that Kutúzov and
      others were there for that purpose, but that he had heard that the
      regiments were to be made up to their full strength, that fighting would
      probably go on for a long time yet, and that things being so it was quite
      likely he might be in command of a regiment in a couple of years’ time.
    </p>
<p>
      As he looked at the matter in this way, he learned that he was being sent
      to Vorónezh to buy remounts for his division, not only without regret at
      being prevented from taking part in the coming battle, but with the
      greatest pleasure—which he did not conceal and which his comrades
      fully understood.
    </p>
<p>
      A few days before the battle of Borodinó, Nicholas received the necessary
      money and warrants, and having sent some hussars on in advance, he set out
      with post horses for Vorónezh.
    </p>
<p>
      Only a man who has experienced it—that is, has passed some months
      continuously in an atmosphere of campaigning and war—can understand
      the delight Nicholas felt when he escaped from the region covered by the
      army’s foraging operations, provision trains, and hospitals. When—free
      from soldiers, wagons, and the filthy traces of a camp—he saw
      villages with peasants and peasant women, gentlemen’s country houses,
      fields where cattle were grazing, posthouses with stationmasters asleep in
      them, he rejoiced as though seeing all this for the first time. What for a
      long while specially surprised and delighted him were the women, young and
      healthy, without a dozen officers making up to each of them; women, too,
      who were pleased and flattered that a passing officer should joke with
      them.
    </p>
<p>
      In the highest spirits Nicholas arrived at night at a hotel in Vorónezh,
      ordered things he had long been deprived of in camp, and next day, very
      clean-shaven and in a full-dress uniform he had not worn for a long time,
      went to present himself to the authorities.
    </p>
<p>
      The commander of the militia was a civilian general, an old man who was
      evidently pleased with his military designation and rank. He received
      Nicholas brusquely (imagining this to be characteristically military) and
      questioned him with an important air, as if considering the general
      progress of affairs and approving and disapproving with full right to do
      so. Nicholas was in such good spirits that this merely amused him.
    </p>
<p>
      From the commander of the militia he drove to the governor. The governor
      was a brisk little man, very simple and affable. He indicated the stud
      farms at which Nicholas might procure horses, recommended to him a horse
      dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles out of town who had the
      best horses, and promised to assist him in every way.
    </p>
<p>
      “You are Count Ilyá Rostóv’s son? My wife was a great friend of your
      mother’s. We are at home on Thursdays—today is Thursday, so please
      come and see us quite informally,” said the governor, taking leave of him.
    </p>
<p>
      Immediately on leaving the governor’s, Nicholas hired post horses and,
      taking his squadron quartermaster with him, drove at a gallop to the
      landowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud. Everything seemed to him
      pleasant and easy during that first part of his stay in Vorónezh and, as
      usually happens when a man is in a pleasant state of mind, everything went
      well and easily.
    </p>
<p>
      The landowner to whom Nicholas went was a bachelor, an old cavalryman, a
      horse fancier, a sportsman, the possessor of some century-old brandy and
      some old Hungarian wine, who had a snuggery where he smoked, and who owned
      some splendid horses.
    </p>
<p>
      In very few words Nicholas bought seventeen picked stallions for six
      thousand rubles—to serve, as he said, as samples of his remounts.
      After dining and taking rather too much of the Hungarian wine, Nicholas—having
      exchanged kisses with the landowner, with whom he was already on the
      friendliest terms—galloped back over abominable roads, in the
      brightest frame of mind, continually urging on the driver so as to be in
      time for the governor’s party.
    </p>
<p>
      When he had changed, poured water over his head, and scented himself,
      Nicholas arrived at the governor’s rather late, but with the phrase
      “better late than never” on his lips.
    </p>
<p>
      It was not a ball, nor had dancing been announced, but everyone knew that
      Catherine Petróvna would play valses and the <i>écossaise</i> on the clavichord
      and that there would be dancing, and so everyone had come as to a ball.
    </p>
<p>
      Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual, but with this
      difference, that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of the
      arrival of many wealthy families from Moscow, and as in everything that
      went on in Russia at that time a special recklessness was noticeable, an
      “in for a penny, in for a pound—who cares?” spirit, and the
      inevitable small talk, instead of turning on the weather and mutual
      acquaintances, now turned on Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.
    </p>
<p>
      The society gathered together at the governor’s was the best in Vorónezh.
    </p>
<p>
      There were a great many ladies and some of Nicholas’ Moscow acquaintances,
      but there were no men who could at all vie with the cavalier of St.
      George, the hussar remount officer, the good-natured and well-bred Count
      Rostóv. Among the men was an Italian prisoner, an officer of the French
      army; and Nicholas felt that the presence of that prisoner enhanced his
      own importance as a Russian hero. The Italian was, as it were, a war
      trophy. Nicholas felt this, it seemed to him that everyone regarded the
      Italian in the same light, and he treated him cordially though with
      dignity and restraint.
    </p>
<p>
      As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform, diffusing around him a
      fragrance of perfume and wine, and had uttered the words “better late than
      never” and heard them repeated several times by others, people clustered
      around him; all eyes turned on him, and he felt at once that he had
      entered into his proper position in the province—that of a universal
      favorite: a very pleasant position, and intoxicatingly so after his long
      privations. At posting stations, at inns, and in the landowner’s snuggery,
      maidservants had been flattered by his notice, and here too at the
      governor’s party there were (as it seemed to Nicholas) an inexhaustible
      number of pretty young women, married and unmarried, impatiently awaiting
      his notice. The women and girls flirted with him and, from the first day,
      the people concerned themselves to get this fine young daredevil of an
      hussar married and settled down. Among these was the governor’s wife
      herself, who welcomed Rostóv as a near relative and called him “Nicholas.”
     </p>
<p>
      Catherine Petróvna did actually play valses and the <i>écossaise</i>, and dancing
      began in which Nicholas still further captivated the provincial society by
      his agility. His particularly free manner of dancing even surprised them
      all. Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way he danced that
      evening. He had never danced like that in Moscow and would even have
      considered such a very free and easy manner improper and in bad form, but
      here he felt it incumbent on him to astonish them all by something
      unusual, something they would have to accept as the regular thing in the
      capital though new to them in the provinces.
    </p>
<p>
      All the evening Nicholas paid attention to a blue-eyed, plump and pleasing
      little blonde, the wife of one of the provincial officials. With the naïve
      conviction of young men in a merry mood that other men’s wives were
      created for them, Rostóv did not leave the lady’s side and treated her
      husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style, as if, without speaking of
      it, they knew how capitally Nicholas and the lady would get on together.
      The husband, however, did not seem to share that conviction and tried to
      behave morosely with Rostóv. But the latter’s good-natured naïveté was so
      boundless that sometimes even he involuntarily yielded to Nicholas’ good
      humor. Toward the end of the evening, however, as the wife’s face grew
      more flushed and animated, the husband’s became more and more melancholy
      and solemn, as though there were but a given amount of animation between
      them and as the wife’s share increased the husband’s diminished.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER V
    </h3>
<p>
      Nicholas sat leaning slightly forward in an armchair, bending closely over
      the blonde lady and paying her mythological compliments with a smile that
      never left his face. Jauntily shifting the position of his legs in their
      tight riding breeches, diffusing an odor of perfume, and admiring his
      partner, himself, and the fine outlines of his legs in their well-fitting
      Hessian boots, Nicholas told the blonde lady that he wished to run away
      with a certain lady here in Vorónezh.
    </p>
<p>
      “Which lady?”
     </p>
<p>
      “A charming lady, a divine one. Her eyes” (Nicholas looked at his partner)
      “are blue, her mouth coral and ivory; her figure” (he glanced at her
      shoulders) “like Diana’s....”
     </p>
<p>
      The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talking
      about.
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah, Nikíta Iványch!” cried Nicholas, rising politely, and as if wishing
      Nikíta Iványch to share his joke, he began to tell him of his intention to
      elope with a blonde lady.
    </p>
<p>
      The husband smiled gloomily, the wife gaily. The governor’s good-natured
      wife came up with a look of disapproval.
    </p>
<p>
      “Anna Ignátyevna wants to see you, Nicholas,” said she, pronouncing the
      name so that Nicholas at once understood that Anna Ignátyevna was a very
      important person. “Come, Nicholas! You know you let me call you so?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Oh, yes, Aunt. Who is she?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Anna Ignátyevna Malvíntseva. She has heard from her niece how you rescued
      her.... Can you guess?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I rescued such a lot of them!” said Nicholas.
    </p>
<p>
      “Her niece, Princess Bolkónskaya. She is here in Vorónezh with her aunt.
      Oho! How you blush. Why, are...?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Not a bit! Please don’t, Aunt!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Very well, very well!... Oh, what a fellow you are!”
     </p>
<p>
      The governor’s wife led him up to a tall and very stout old lady with a
      blue headdress, who had just finished her game of cards with the most
      important personages of the town. This was Malvíntseva, Princess Mary’s
      aunt on her mother’s side, a rich, childless widow who always lived in
      Vorónezh. When Rostóv approached her she was standing settling up for the
      game. She looked at him and, screwing up her eyes sternly, continued to
      upbraid the general who had won from her.
    </p>
<p>
      “Very pleased, <i>mon cher</i>,” she then said, holding out her
      hand to Nicholas. “Pray come and see me.”
     </p>
<p>
      After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whom
      Malvíntseva had evidently not liked, and having asked what Nicholas knew
      of Prince Andrew, who also was evidently no favorite of hers, the
      important old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invitation to
      come to see her.
    </p>
<p>
      Nicholas promised to come and blushed again as he bowed. At the mention of
      Princess Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness and even of fear, which
      he himself did not understand.
    </p>
<p>
      When he had parted from Malvíntseva Nicholas wished to return to the
      dancing, but the governor’s little wife placed her plump hand on his
      sleeve and, saying that she wanted to have a talk with him, led him to her
      sitting room, from which those who were there immediately withdrew so as
      not to be in her way.
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you know, dear boy,” began the governor’s wife with a serious
      expression on her kind little face, “that really would be the match for
      you: would you like me to arrange it?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Whom do you mean, Aunt?” asked Nicholas.
    </p>
<p>
      “I will make a match for you with the princess. Catherine Petróvna speaks
      of Lily, but I say, no—the princess! Do you want me to do it? I am
      sure your mother will be grateful to me. What a charming girl she is,
      really! And she is not at all so plain, either.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Not at all,” replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea. “As befits a
      soldier, Aunt, I don’t force myself on anyone or refuse anything,” he said
      before he had time to consider what he was saying.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well then, remember, this is not a joke!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Of course not!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, yes,” the governor’s wife said as if talking to herself. “But, my
      dear boy, among other things you are too attentive to the other, the
      blonde. One is sorry for the husband, really....”
     </p>
<p>
      “Oh no, we are good friends with him,” said Nicholas in the simplicity of
      his heart; it did not enter his head that a pastime so pleasant to himself
      might not be pleasant to someone else.
    </p>
<p>
      “But what nonsense I have been saying to the governor’s wife!” thought
      Nicholas suddenly at supper. “She will really begin to arrange a match...
      and Sónya...?” And on taking leave of the governor’s wife, when she again
      smilingly said to him, “Well then, remember!” he drew her aside.
    </p>
<p>
      “But see here, to tell the truth, Aunt...”
     </p>
<p>
      “What is it, my dear? Come, let’s sit down here,” said she.
    </p>
<p>
      Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimate
      thoughts (which he would not have told to his mother, his sister, or his
      friend) to this woman who was almost a stranger. When he afterwards
      recalled that impulse to unsolicited and inexplicable frankness which had
      very important results for him, it seemed to him—as it seems to
      everyone in such cases—that it was merely some silly whim that
      seized him: yet that burst of frankness, together with other trifling
      events, had immense consequences for him and for all his family.
    </p>
<p>
      “You see, Aunt, Mamma has long wanted me to marry an heiress, but the very
      idea of marrying for money is repugnant to me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Oh yes, I understand,” said the governor’s wife.
    </p>
<p>
      “But Princess Bolkónskaya—that’s another matter. I will tell you the
      truth. In the first place I like her very much, I feel drawn to her; and
      then, after I met her under such circumstances—so strangely, the
      idea often occurred to me: ‘This is fate.’ Especially if you remember that
      Mamma had long been thinking of it; but I had never happened to meet her
      before, somehow it had always happened that we did not meet. And as long
      as my sister Natásha was engaged to her brother it was of course out of
      the question for me to think of marrying her. And it must needs happen
      that I should meet her just when Natásha’s engagement had been broken
      off... and then everything... So you see... I never told this to anyone
      and never will, only to you.”
     </p>
<p>
      The governor’s wife pressed his elbow gratefully.
    </p>
<p>
      “You know Sónya, my cousin? I love her, and promised to marry her, and
      will do so.... So you see there can be no question about—” said
      Nicholas incoherently and blushing.
    </p>
<p>
      “My dear boy, what a way to look at it! You know Sónya has nothing and you
      yourself say your Papa’s affairs are in a very bad way. And what about
      your mother? It would kill her, that’s one thing. And what sort of life
      would it be for Sónya—if she’s a girl with a heart? Your mother in
      despair, and you all ruined.... No, my dear, you and Sónya ought to
      understand that.”
     </p>
<p>
      Nicholas remained silent. It comforted him to hear these arguments.
    </p>
<p>
      “All the same, Aunt, it is impossible,” he rejoined with a sigh, after a
      short pause. “Besides, would the princess have me? And besides, she is now
      in mourning. How can one think of it!”
     </p>
<p>
      “But you don’t suppose I’m going to get you married at once? There is
      always a right way of doing things,” replied the governor’s wife.
    </p>
<p>
      “What a matchmaker you are, Aunt...” said Nicholas, kissing her plump
      little hand.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER VI
    </h3>
<p>
      On reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rostóv, Princess Mary had found
      her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince Andrew giving
      her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvíntseva at Vorónezh. That
      feeling akin to temptation which had tormented her during her father’s
      illness, since his death, and especially since her meeting with Rostóv was
      smothered by arrangements for the journey, anxiety about her brother,
      settling in a new house, meeting new people, and attending to her nephew’s
      education. She was sad. Now, after a month passed in quiet surroundings,
      she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father which was associated
      in her mind with the ruin of Russia. She was agitated and incessantly
      tortured by the thought of the dangers to which her brother, the only
      intimate person now remaining to her, was exposed. She was worried too
      about her nephew’s education for which she had always felt herself
      incompetent, but in the depths of her soul she felt at peace—a peace
      arising from consciousness of having stifled those personal dreams and
      hopes that had been on the point of awakening within her and were related
      to her meeting with Rostóv.
    </p>
<p>
      The day after her party the governor’s wife came to see Malvíntseva and,
      after discussing her plan with the aunt, remarked that though under
      present circumstances a formal betrothal was, of course, not to be thought
      of, all the same the young people might be brought together and could get
      to know one another. Malvíntseva expressed approval, and the governor’s
      wife began to speak of Rostóv in Mary’s presence, praising him and telling
      how he had blushed when Princess Mary’s name was mentioned. But Princess
      Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyful feeling—her mental
      tranquillity was destroyed, and desires, doubts, self-reproach, and hopes
      reawoke.
    </p>
<p>
      During the two days that elapsed before Rostóv called, Princess Mary
      continually thought of how she ought to behave to him. First she decided
      not to come to the drawing room when he called to see her aunt—that
      it would not be proper for her, in her deep mourning, to receive visitors;
      then she thought this would be rude after what he had done for her; then
      it occurred to her that her aunt and the governor’s wife had intentions
      concerning herself and Rostóv—their looks and words at times seemed
      to confirm this supposition—then she told herself that only she,
      with her sinful nature, could think this of them: they could not forget
      that situated as she was, while still wearing deep mourning, such
      matchmaking would be an insult to her and to her father’s memory. Assuming
      that she did go down to see him, Princess Mary imagined the words he would
      say to her and what she would say to him, and these words sometimes seemed
      undeservedly cold and then to mean too much. More than anything she feared
      lest the confusion she felt might overwhelm her and betray her as soon as
      she saw him.
    </p>
<p>
      But when on Sunday after church the footman announced in the drawing room
      that Count Rostóv had called, the princess showed no confusion, only a
      slight blush suffused her cheeks and her eyes lit up with a new and
      radiant light.
    </p>
<p>
      “You have met him, Aunt?” said she in a calm voice, unable herself to
      understand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural.
    </p>
<p>
      When Rostóv entered the room, the princess dropped her eyes for an
      instant, as if to give the visitor time to greet her aunt, and then just
      as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his look with
      shining eyes. With a movement full of dignity and grace she half rose with
      a smile of pleasure, held out her slender, delicate hand to him, and began
      to speak in a voice in which for the first time new deep womanly notes
      vibrated. Mademoiselle Bourienne, who was in the drawing room, looked at
      Princess Mary in bewildered surprise. Herself a consummate coquette, she
      could not have maneuvered better on meeting a man she wished to attract.
    </p>
<p>
      “Either black is particularly becoming to her or she really has greatly
      improved without my having noticed it. And above all, what tact and
      grace!” thought Mademoiselle Bourienne.
    </p>
<p>
      Had Princess Mary been capable of reflection at that moment, she would
      have been more surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at the change that
      had taken place in herself. From the moment she recognized that dear,
      loved face, a new life force took possession of her and compelled her to
      speak and act apart from her own will. From the time Rostóv entered, her
      face became suddenly transformed. It was as if a light had been kindled in
      a carved and painted lantern and the intricate, skillful, artistic work on
      its sides, that previously seemed dark, coarse, and meaningless, was
      suddenly shown up in unexpected and striking beauty. For the first time
      all that pure, spiritual, inward travail through which she had lived
      appeared on the surface. All her inward labor, her dissatisfaction with
      herself, her sufferings, her strivings after goodness, her meekness, love,
      and self-sacrifice—all this now shone in those radiant eyes, in her
      delicate smile, and in every trait of her gentle face.
    </p>
<p>
      Rostóv saw all this as clearly as if he had known her whole life. He felt
      that the being before him was quite different from, and better than,
      anyone he had met before, and above all better than himself.
    </p>
<p>
      Their conversation was very simple and unimportant. They spoke of the war,
      and like everyone else unconsciously exaggerated their sorrow about it;
      they spoke of their last meeting—Nicholas trying to change the
      subject—they talked of the governor’s kind wife, of Nicholas’
      relations, and of Princess Mary’s.
    </p>
<p>
      She did not talk about her brother, diverting the conversation as soon as
      her aunt mentioned Andrew. Evidently she could speak of Russia’s
      misfortunes with a certain artificiality, but her brother was too near her
      heart and she neither could nor would speak lightly of him. Nicholas
      noticed this, as he noticed every shade of Princess Mary’s character with
      an observation unusual to him, and everything confirmed his conviction
      that she was a quite unusual and extraordinary being. Nicholas blushed and
      was confused when people spoke to him about the princess (as she did when
      he was mentioned) and even when he thought of her, but in her presence he
      felt quite at ease, and said not at all what he had prepared, but what,
      quite appropriately, occurred to him at the moment.
    </p>
<p>
      When a pause occurred during his short visit, Nicholas, as is usual when
      there are children, turned to Prince Andrew’s little son, caressing him
      and asking whether he would like to be an hussar. He took the boy on his
      knee, played with him, and looked round at Princess Mary. With a softened,
      happy, timid look she watched the boy she loved in the arms of the man she
      loved. Nicholas also noticed that look and, as if understanding it,
      flushed with pleasure and began to kiss the boy with good natured
      playfulness.
    </p>
<p>
      As she was in mourning Princess Mary did not go out into society, and
      Nicholas did not think it the proper thing to visit her again; but all the
      same the governor’s wife went on with her matchmaking, passing on to
      Nicholas the flattering things Princess Mary said of him and vice versa,
      and insisting on his declaring himself to Princess Mary. For this purpose
      she arranged a meeting between the young people at the bishop’s house
      before Mass.
    </p>
<p>
      Though Rostóv told the governor’s wife that he would not make any
      declaration to Princess Mary, he promised to go.
    </p>
<p>
      As at Tilsit Rostóv had not allowed himself to doubt that what everybody
      considered right was right, so now, after a short but sincere struggle
      between his effort to arrange his life by his own sense of justice, and in
      obedient submission to circumstances, he chose the latter and yielded to
      the power he felt irresistibly carrying him he knew not where. He knew
      that after his promise to Sónya it would be what he deemed base to declare
      his feelings to Princess Mary. And he knew that he would never act basely.
      But he also knew (or rather felt at the bottom of his heart) that by
      resigning himself now to the force of circumstances and to those who were
      guiding him, he was not only doing nothing wrong, but was doing something
      very important—more important than anything he had ever done in his
      life.
    </p>
<p>
      After meeting Princess Mary, though the course of his life went on
      externally as before, all his former amusements lost their charm for him
      and he often thought about her. But he never thought about her as he had
      thought of all the young ladies without exception whom he had met in
      society, nor as he had for a long time, and at one time rapturously,
      thought about Sónya. He had pictured each of those young ladies as almost
      all honest-hearted young men do, that is, as a possible wife, adapting her
      in his imagination to all the conditions of married life: a white dressing
      gown, his wife at the tea table, his wife’s carriage, little ones, Mamma
      and Papa, their relations to her, and so on—and these pictures of
      the future had given him pleasure. But with Princess Mary, to whom they
      were trying to get him engaged, he could never picture anything of future
      married life. If he tried, his pictures seemed incongruous and false. It
      made him afraid.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER VII
    </h3>
<p>
      The dreadful news of the battle of Borodinó, of our losses in killed and
      wounded, and the still more terrible news of the loss of Moscow reached
      Vorónezh in the middle of September. Princess Mary, having learned of her
      brother’s wound only from the <i>Gazette</i> and having no definite news of
      him, prepared (so Nicholas heard, he had not seen her again himself) to set off
      in search of Prince Andrew.
    </p>
<p>
      When he received the news of the battle of Borodinó and the abandonment of
      Moscow, Rostóv was not seized with despair, anger, the desire for
      vengeance, or any feeling of that kind, but everything in Vorónezh
      suddenly seemed to him dull and tiresome, and he experienced an indefinite
      feeling of shame and awkwardness. The conversations he heard seemed to him
      insincere; he did not know how to judge all these affairs and felt that
      only in the regiment would everything again become clear to him. He made
      haste to finish buying the horses, and often became unreasonably angry
      with his servant and squadron quartermaster.
    </p>
<p>
      A few days before his departure a special thanksgiving, at which Nicholas
      was present, was held in the cathedral for the Russian victory. He stood a
      little behind the governor and held himself with military decorum through
      the service, meditating on a great variety of subjects. When the service
      was over the governor’s wife beckoned him to her.
    </p>
<p>
      “Have you seen the princess?” she asked, indicating with a movement of her
      head a lady standing on the opposite side, beyond the choir.
    </p>
<p>
      Nicholas immediately recognized Princess Mary not so much by the profile
      he saw under her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude, timidity, and
      pity that immediately overcame him. Princess Mary, evidently engrossed by
      her thoughts, was crossing herself for the last time before leaving the
      church.
    </p>
<p>
      Nicholas looked at her face with surprise. It was the same face he had
      seen before, there was the same general expression of refined, inner,
      spiritual labor, but now it was quite differently lit up. There was a
      pathetic expression of sorrow, prayer, and hope in it. As had occurred
      before when she was present, Nicholas went up to her without waiting to be
      prompted by the governor’s wife and not asking himself whether or not it
      was right and proper to address her here in church, and told her he had
      heard of her trouble and sympathized with his whole soul. As soon as she
      heard his voice a vivid glow kindled in her face, lighting up both her
      sorrow and her joy.
    </p>
<p>
      “There is one thing I wanted to tell you, Princess,” said Rostóv. “It is
      that if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikoláevich, were not living, it would
      have been at once announced in the <i>Gazette</i>, as he is a colonel.”
     </p>
<p>
      The princess looked at him, not grasping what he was saying, but cheered
      by the expression of regretful sympathy on his face.
    </p>
<p>
      “And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound” (the <i>Gazette</i> said it
      was a shell) “either proving fatal at once or being very slight,”
       continued Nicholas. “We must hope for the best, and I am sure...”
     </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary interrupted him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, that would be so dread...” she began and, prevented by agitation from
      finishing, she bent her head with a movement as graceful as everything she
      did in his presence and, looking up at him gratefully, went out, following
      her aunt.
    </p>
<p>
      That evening Nicholas did not go out, but stayed at home to settle some
      accounts with the horse dealers. When he had finished that business it was
      already too late to go anywhere but still too early to go to bed, and for
      a long time he paced up and down the room, reflecting on his life, a thing
      he rarely did.
    </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary had made an agreeable impression on him when he had met her
      in Smolénsk province. His having encountered her in such exceptional
      circumstances, and his mother having at one time mentioned her to him as a
      good match, had drawn his particular attention to her. When he met her
      again in Vorónezh the impression she made on him was not merely pleasing
      but powerful. Nicholas had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty he
      observed in her at this time. He was, however, preparing to go away and it
      had not entered his head to regret that he was thus depriving himself of
      chances of meeting her. But that day’s encounter in church had, he felt,
      sunk deeper than was desirable for his peace of mind. That pale, sad,
      refined face, that radiant look, those gentle graceful gestures, and
      especially the deep and tender sorrow expressed in all her features
      agitated him and evoked his sympathy. In men Rostóv could not bear to see
      the expression of a higher spiritual life (that was why he did not like
      Prince Andrew) and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophy and
      dreaminess, but in Princess Mary that very sorrow which revealed the depth
      of a whole spiritual world foreign to him was an irresistible attraction.
    </p>
<p>
      “She must be a wonderful woman. A real angel!” he said to himself. “Why am
      I not free? Why was I in such a hurry with Sónya?” And he involuntarily
      compared the two: the lack of spirituality in the one and the abundance of
      it in the other—a spirituality he himself lacked and therefore
      valued most highly. He tried to picture what would happen were he free.
      How he would propose to her and how she would become his wife. But no, he
      could not imagine that. He felt awed, and no clear picture presented
      itself to his mind. He had long ago pictured to himself a future with
      Sónya, and that was all clear and simple just because it had all been
      thought out and he knew all there was in Sónya, but it was impossible to
      picture a future with Princess Mary, because he did not understand her but
      simply loved her.
    </p>
<p>
      Reveries about Sónya had had something merry and playful in them, but to
      dream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a little frightening.
    </p>
<p>
      “How she prayed!” he thought. “It was plain that her whole soul was in her
      prayer. Yes, that was the prayer that moves mountains, and I am sure her
      prayer will be answered. Why don’t I pray for what I want?” he suddenly
      thought. “What do I want? To be free, released from Sónya... She was
      right,” he thought, remembering what the governor’s wife had said:
      “Nothing but misfortune can come of marrying Sónya. Muddles, grief for
      Mamma... business difficulties... muddles, terrible muddles! Besides, I
      don’t love her—not as I should. O, God! release me from this
      dreadful, inextricable position!” he suddenly began to pray. “Yes, prayer
      can move mountains, but one must have faith and not pray as Natásha and I
      used to as children, that the snow might turn into sugar—and then
      run out into the yard to see whether it had done so. No, but I am not
      praying for trifles now,” he thought as he put his pipe down in a corner,
      and folding his hands placed himself before the icon. Softened by memories
      of Princess Mary he began to pray as he had not done for a long time.
      Tears were in his eyes and in his throat when the door opened and
      Lavrúshka came in with some papers.
    </p>
<p>
      “Blockhead! Why do you come in without being called?” cried Nicholas,
      quickly changing his attitude.
    </p>
<p>
      “From the governor,” said Lavrúshka in a sleepy voice. “A courier has
      arrived and there’s a letter for you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, all right, thanks. You can go!”
     </p>
<p>
      Nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mother and the
      other from Sónya. He recognized them by the handwriting and opened Sónya’s
      first. He had read only a few lines when he turned pale and his eyes
      opened wide with fear and joy.
    </p>
<p>
      “No, it’s not possible!” he cried aloud.
    </p>
<p>
      Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holding the letter and
      reading it. He glanced through it, then read it again, and then again, and
      standing still in the middle of the room he raised his shoulders,
      stretching out his hands, with his mouth wide open and his eyes fixed.
      What he had just been praying for with confidence that God would hear him
      had come to pass; but Nicholas was as much astonished as if it were
      something extraordinary and unexpected, and as if the very fact that it
      had happened so quickly proved that it had not come from God to whom he
      had prayed, but by some ordinary coincidence.
    </p>
<p>
      This unexpected and, as it seemed to Nicholas, quite voluntary letter from
      Sónya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from which there had
      seemed no escape. She wrote that the last unfortunate events—the
      loss of almost the whole of the Rostóvs’ Moscow property—and the
      countess’ repeatedly expressed wish that Nicholas should marry Princess
      Bolkónskaya, together with his silence and coldness of late, had all
      combined to make her decide to release him from his promise and set him
      completely free.
    </p>
<p>
      It would be too painful to me to think that I might be a cause of sorrow
      or discord in the family that has been so good to me (she wrote), and my
      love has no aim but the happiness of those I love; so, Nicholas, I beg you
      to consider yourself free, and to be assured that, in spite of everything,
      no one can love you more than does
    </p>
<p>
      Your Sónya
    </p>
<p>
      Both letters were written from Tróitsa. The other, from the countess,
      described their last days in Moscow, their departure, the fire, and the
      destruction of all their property. In this letter the countess also
      mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them;
      his state was very critical, but the doctor said there was now more hope.
      Sónya and Natásha were nursing him.
    </p>
<p>
      Next day Nicholas took his mother’s letter and went to see Princess Mary.
      Neither he nor she said a word about what “Natásha nursing him” might
      mean, but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost as
      intimate with the princess as if they were relations.
    </p>
<p>
      The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yaroslávl,
      and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER VIII
    </h3>
<p>
      Sónya’s letter written from Tróitsa, which had come as an answer to
      Nicholas’ prayer, was prompted by this: the thought of getting Nicholas
      married to an heiress occupied the old countess’ mind more and more. She
      knew that Sónya was the chief obstacle to this happening, and Sónya’s life
      in the countess’ house had grown harder and harder, especially after they
      had received a letter from Nicholas telling of his meeting with Princess
      Mary in Boguchárovo. The countess let no occasion slip of making
      humiliating or cruel allusions to Sónya.
    </p>
<p>
      But a few days before they left Moscow, moved and excited by all that was
      going on, she called Sónya to her and, instead of reproaching and making
      demands on her, tearfully implored her to sacrifice herself and repay all
      that the family had done for her by breaking off her engagement with
      Nicholas.
    </p>
<p>
      “I shall not be at peace till you promise me this.”
     </p>
<p>
      Sónya burst into hysterical tears and replied through her sobs that she
      would do anything and was prepared for anything, but gave no actual
      promise and could not bring herself to decide to do what was demanded of
      her. She must sacrifice herself for the family that had reared and brought
      her up. To sacrifice herself for others was Sónya’s habit. Her position in
      the house was such that only by sacrifice could she show her worth, and
      she was accustomed to this and loved doing it. But in all her former acts
      of self-sacrifice she had been happily conscious that they raised her in
      her own esteem and in that of others, and so made her more worthy of
      Nicholas whom she loved more than anything in the world. But now they
      wanted her to sacrifice the very thing that constituted the whole reward
      for her self-sacrifice and the whole meaning of her life. And for the
      first time she felt bitterness against those who had been her benefactors
      only to torture her the more painfully; she felt jealous of Natásha who
      had never experienced anything of this sort, had never needed to sacrifice
      herself, but made others sacrifice themselves for her and yet was beloved
      by everybody. And for the first time Sónya felt that out of her pure,
      quiet love for Nicholas a passionate feeling was beginning to grow up
      which was stronger than principle, virtue, or religion. Under the
      influence of this feeling Sónya, whose life of dependence had taught her
      involuntarily to be secretive, having answered the countess in vague
      general terms, avoided talking with her and resolved to wait till she
      should see Nicholas, not in order to set him free but on the contrary at
      that meeting to bind him to her forever.
    </p>
<p>
      The bustle and terror of the Rostóvs’ last days in Moscow stifled the
      gloomy thoughts that oppressed Sónya. She was glad to find escape from
      them in practical activity. But when she heard of Prince Andrew’s presence
      in their house, despite her sincere pity for him and for Natásha, she was
      seized by a joyful and superstitious feeling that God did not intend her
      to be separated from Nicholas. She knew that Natásha loved no one but
      Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him. She knew that being thrown
      together again under such terrible circumstances they would again fall in
      love with one another, and that Nicholas would then not be able to marry
      Princess Mary as they would be within the prohibited degrees of affinity.
      Despite all the terror of what had happened during those last days and
      during the first days of their journey, this feeling that Providence was
      intervening in her personal affairs cheered Sónya.
    </p>
<p>
      At the Tróitsa monastery the Rostóvs first broke their journey for a whole
      day.
    </p>
<p>
      Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry, one of
      which was occupied by Prince Andrew. The wounded man was much better that
      day and Natásha was sitting with him. In the next room sat the count and
      countess respectfully conversing with the prior, who was calling on them
      as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery. Sónya was there
      too, tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and Natásha were
      talking about. She heard the sound of their voices through the door. That
      door opened and Natásha came out, looking excited. Not noticing the monk,
      who had risen to greet her and was drawing back the wide sleeve on his
      right arm, she went up to Sónya and took her hand.
    </p>
<p>
      “Natásha, what are you about? Come here!” said the countess.
    </p>
<p>
      Natásha went up to the monk for his blessing, and he advised her to pray
      for aid to God and His saint.
    </p>
<p>
      As soon as the prior withdrew, Natásha took her friend by the hand and
      went with her into the unoccupied room.
    </p>
<p>
      “Sónya, will he live?” she asked. “Sónya, how happy I am, and how
      unhappy!... Sónya, dovey, everything is as it used to be. If only he
      lives! He cannot... because... because... of...” and Natásha burst into
      tears.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes! I knew it! Thank God!” murmured Sónya. “He will live.”
     </p>
<p>
      Sónya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter’s fear and grief
      and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one. Sobbing,
      she kissed and comforted Natásha. “If only he lives!” she thought. Having
      wept, talked, and wiped away their tears, the two friends went together to
      Prince Andrew’s door. Natásha opened it cautiously and glanced into the
      room, Sónya standing beside her at the half-open door.
    </p>
<p>
      Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows. His pale face was
      calm, his eyes closed, and they could see his regular breathing.
    </p>
<p>
      “O, Natásha!” Sónya suddenly almost screamed, catching her companion’s arm
      and stepping back from the door.
    </p>
<p>
      “What? What is it?” asked Natásha.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s that, that...” said Sónya, with a white face and trembling lips.
    </p>
<p>
      Natásha softly closed the door and went with Sónya to the window, not yet
      understanding what the latter was telling her.
    </p>
<p>
      “You remember,” said Sónya with a solemn and frightened expression. “You
      remember when I looked in the mirror for you... at Otrádnoe at Christmas?
      Do you remember what I saw?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, yes!” cried Natásha opening her eyes wide, and vaguely recalling
      that Sónya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen
      lying down.
    </p>
<p>
      “You remember?” Sónya went on. “I saw it then and told everybody, you and
      Dunyásha. I saw him lying on a bed,” said she, making a gesture with her
      hand and a lifted finger at each detail, “and that he had his eyes closed
      and was covered just with a pink quilt, and that his hands were folded,”
       she concluded, convincing herself that the details she had just seen were
      exactly what she had seen in the mirror.
    </p>
<p>
      She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing that
      came into her head, but what she had invented then seemed to her now as
      real as any other recollection. She not only remembered what she had then
      said—that he turned to look at her and smiled and was covered with
      something red—but was firmly convinced that she had then seen and
      said that he was covered with a pink quilt and that his eyes were closed.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, yes, it really was pink!” cried Natásha, who now thought she too
      remembered the word pink being used, and saw in this the most
      extraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction.
    </p>
<p>
      “But what does it mean?” she added meditatively.
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, I don’t know, it is all so strange,” replied Sónya, clutching at her
      head.
    </p>
<p>
      A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natásha went to him, but Sónya,
      feeling unusually excited and touched, remained at the window thinking
      about the strangeness of what had occurred.
    </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
      They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army, and the
      countess was writing to her son.
    </p>
<p>
      “Sónya!” said the countess, raising her eyes from her letter as her niece
      passed, “Sónya, won’t you write to Nicholas?” She spoke in a soft,
      tremulous voice, and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectacles
      Sónya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words. Those
      eyes expressed entreaty, shame at having to ask, fear of a refusal, and
      readiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal.
    </p>
<p>
      Sónya went up to the countess and, kneeling down, kissed her hand.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, Mamma, I will write,” said she.
    </p>
<p>
      Sónya was softened, excited, and touched by all that had occurred that
      day, especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of her
      vision. Now that she knew that the renewal of Natásha’s relations with
      Prince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marrying Princess Mary, she was
      joyfully conscious of a return of that self-sacrificing spirit in which
      she was accustomed to live and loved to live. So with a joyful
      consciousness of performing a magnanimous deed—interrupted several
      times by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes—she wrote that
      touching letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER IX
    </h3>
<p>
      The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him with
      hostility but yet with respect, in the guardhouse to which he was taken.
      In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as to
      who he might be—perhaps a very important person—and hostility
      as a result of their recent personal conflict with him.
    </p>
<p>
      But when the guard was relieved next morning, Pierre felt that for the new
      guard—both officers and men—he was not as interesting as he
      had been to his captors; and in fact the guard of the second day did not
      recognize in this big, stout man in a peasant coat the vigorous person who
      had fought so desperately with the marauder and the convoy and had uttered
      those solemn words about saving a child; they saw in him only No. 17 of
      the captured Russians, arrested and detained for some reason by order of
      the Higher Command. If they noticed anything remarkable about Pierre, it
      was only his unabashed, meditative concentration and thoughtfulness, and
      the way he spoke French, which struck them as surprisingly good. In spite
      of this he was placed that day with the other arrested suspects, as the
      separate room he had occupied was required by an officer.
    </p>
<p>
      All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and,
      recognizing him as a gentleman, they all avoided him, more especially as
      he spoke French. Pierre felt sad at hearing them making fun of him.
    </p>
<p>
      That evening he learned that all these prisoners (he, probably, among
      them) were to be tried for incendiarism. On the third day he was taken
      with the others to a house where a French general with a white mustache
      sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms. With
      the precision and definiteness customary in addressing prisoners, and
      which is supposed to preclude human frailty, Pierre like the others was
      questioned as to who he was, where he had been, with what object, and so
      on.
    </p>
<p>
      These questions, like questions put at trials generally, left the essence
      of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of that essence’s being
      revealed, and were designed only to form a channel through which the
      judges wished the answers of the accused to flow so as to lead to the
      desired result, namely a conviction. As soon as Pierre began to say
      anything that did not fit in with that aim, the channel was removed and
      the water could flow to waste. Pierre felt, moreover, what the accused
      always feel at their trial, perplexity as to why these questions were put
      to him. He had a feeling that it was only out of condescension or a kind
      of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed. He knew he
      was in these men’s power, that only by force had they brought him there,
      that force alone gave them the right to demand answers to their questions,
      and that the sole object of that assembly was to inculpate him. And so, as
      they had the power and wish to inculpate him, this expedient of an inquiry
      and trial seemed unnecessary. It was evident that any answer would lead to
      conviction. When asked what he was doing when he was arrested, Pierre
      replied in a rather tragic manner that he was restoring to its parents a
      child he had saved from the flames. Why had he fought the marauder? Pierre
      answered that he “was protecting a woman,” and that “to protect a woman
      who was being insulted was the duty of every man; that...” They
      interrupted him, for this was not to the point. Why was he in the yard of
      a burning house where witnesses had seen him? He replied that he had gone
      out to see what was happening in Moscow. Again they interrupted him: they
      had not asked where he was going, but why he was found near the fire? Who
      was he? they asked, repeating their first question, which he had declined
      to answer. Again he replied that he could not answer it.
    </p>
<p>
      “Put that down, that’s bad... very bad,” sternly remarked the general with
      the white mustache and red flushed face.
    </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
      On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zúbovski rampart.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant’s
      house near the Crimean bridge. On his way through the streets Pierre felt
      stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over the whole city. Fires were
      visible on all sides. He did not then realize the significance of the
      burning of Moscow, and looked at the fires with horror.
    </p>
<p>
      He passed four days in the coach house near the Crimean bridge and during
      that time learned, from the talk of the French soldiers, that all those
      confined there were awaiting a decision which might come any day from the
      marshal. What marshal this was, Pierre could not learn from the soldiers.
      Evidently for them “the marshal” represented a very high and rather
      mysterious power.
    </p>
<p>
      These first days, before the eighth of September when the prisoners were
      had up for a second examination, were the hardest of all for Pierre.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER X
    </h3>
<p>
      On the eighth of September an officer—a very important one judging
      by the respect the guards showed him—entered the coach house where
      the prisoners were. This officer, probably someone on the staff, was
      holding a paper in his hand, and called over all the Russians there,
      naming Pierre as “the man who does not give his name.” Glancing indolently
      and indifferently at all the prisoners, he ordered the officer in charge
      to have them decently dressed and tidied up before taking them to the
      marshal. An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre with
      thirteen others was led to the Virgin’s Field. It was a fine day, sunny
      after rain, and the air was unusually pure. The smoke did not hang low as
      on the day when Pierre had been taken from the guardhouse on the Zúbovski
      rampart, but rose through the pure air in columns. No flames were seen,
      but columns of smoke rose on all sides, and all Moscow as far as Pierre
      could see was one vast charred ruin. On all sides there were waste spaces
      with only stoves and chimney stacks still standing, and here and there the
      blackened walls of some brick houses. Pierre gazed at the ruins and did
      not recognize districts he had known well. Here and there he could see
      churches that had not been burned. The Krémlin, which was not destroyed,
      gleamed white in the distance with its towers and the belfry of Iván the
      Great. The domes of the New Convent of the Virgin glittered brightly and
      its bells were ringing particularly clearly. These bells reminded Pierre
      that it was Sunday and the feast of the Nativity of the Virgin. But there
      seemed to be no one to celebrate this holiday: everywhere were blackened
      ruins, and the few Russians to be seen were tattered and frightened people
      who tried to hide when they saw the French.
    </p>
<p>
      It was plain that the Russian nest was ruined and destroyed, but in place
      of the Russian order of life that had been destroyed, Pierre unconsciously
      felt that a quite different, firm, French order had been established over
      this ruined nest. He felt this in the looks of the soldiers who, marching
      in regular ranks briskly and gaily, were escorting him and the other
      criminals; he felt it in the looks of an important French official in a
      carriage and pair driven by a soldier, whom they met on the way. He felt
      it in the merry sounds of regimental music he heard from the left side of
      the field, and felt and realized it especially from the list of prisoners
      the French officer had read out when he came that morning. Pierre had been
      taken by one set of soldiers and led first to one and then to another
      place with dozens of other men, and it seemed that they might have
      forgotten him, or confused him with the others. But no: the answers he had
      given when questioned had come back to him in his designation as “the man
      who does not give his name,” and under that appellation, which to Pierre
      seemed terrible, they were now leading him somewhere with unhesitating
      assurance on their faces that he and all the other prisoners were exactly
      the ones they wanted and that they were being taken to the proper place.
      Pierre felt himself to be an insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of
      a machine whose action he did not understand but which was working well.
    </p>
<p>
      He and the other prisoners were taken to the right side of the Virgin’s
      Field, to a large white house with an immense garden not far from the
      convent. This was Prince Shcherbátov’s house, where Pierre had often been
      in other days, and which, as he learned from the talk of the soldiers, was
      now occupied by the marshal, the Duke of Eckmühl (Davout).
    </p>
<p>
      They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one. Pierre
      was the sixth to enter. He was conducted through a glass gallery, an
      anteroom, and a hall, which were familiar to him, into a long low study at
      the door of which stood an adjutant.
    </p>
<p>
      Davout, spectacles on nose, sat bent over a table at the further end of
      the room. Pierre went close up to him, but Davout, evidently consulting a
      paper that lay before him, did not look up. Without raising his eyes, he
      said in a low voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Who are you?”
     </p>
<p>
      Pierre was silent because he was incapable of uttering a word. To him
      Davout was not merely a French general, but a man notorious for his
      cruelty. Looking at his cold face, as he sat like a stern schoolmaster who
      was prepared to wait awhile for an answer, Pierre felt that every instant
      of delay might cost him his life; but he did not know what to say. He did
      not venture to repeat what he had said at his first examination, yet to
      disclose his rank and position was dangerous and embarrassing. So he was
      silent. But before he had decided what to do, Davout raised his head,
      pushed his spectacles back on his forehead, screwed up his eyes, and
      looked intently at him.
    </p>
<p>
      “I know that man,” he said in a cold, measured tone, evidently calculated
      to frighten Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      The chill that had been running down Pierre’s back now seized his head as
      in a vise.
    </p>
<p>
      “You cannot know me, General, I have never seen you...”
     </p>
<p>
      “He is a Russian spy,” Davout interrupted, addressing another general who
      was present, but whom Pierre had not noticed.
    </p>
<p>
      Davout turned away. With an unexpected reverberation in his voice Pierre
      rapidly began:
    </p>
<p>
      “No, monseigneur,” he said, suddenly remembering that Davout was a duke.
      “No, monseigneur, you cannot have known me. I am a militia officer and
      have not quitted Moscow.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Your name?” asked Davout.
    </p>
<p>
      “Bezúkhov.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What proof have I that you are not lying?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Monseigneur!” exclaimed Pierre, not in an offended but in a pleading
      voice.
    </p>
<p>
      Davout looked up and gazed intently at him. For some seconds they looked
      at one another, and that look saved Pierre. Apart from conditions of war
      and law, that look established human relations between the two men. At
      that moment an immense number of things passed dimly through both their
      minds, and they realized that they were both children of humanity and were
      brothers.
    </p>
<p>
      At the first glance, when Davout had only raised his head from the papers
      where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierre was merely
      a circumstance, and Davout could have shot him without burdening his
      conscience with an evil deed, but now he saw in him a human being. He
      reflected for a moment.
    </p>
<p>
      “How can you show me that you are telling the truth?” said Davout coldly.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre remembered Ramballe, and named him and his regiment and the street
      where the house was.
    </p>
<p>
      “You are not what you say,” returned Davout.
    </p>
<p>
      In a trembling, faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs of the truth
      of his statements.
    </p>
<p>
      But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout.
    </p>
<p>
      Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought, and began buttoning
      up his uniform. It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his head in
      Pierre’s direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away. But where
      they were to take him Pierre did not know: back to the coach house or to
      the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as they
      crossed the Virgin’s Field.
    </p>
<p>
      He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting another question
      to Davout.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, of course!” replied Davout, but what this “yes” meant, Pierre did
      not know.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it was far, or
      in which direction. His faculties were quite numbed, he was stupefied, and
      noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the others did till
      they all stopped and he stopped too. The only thought in his mind at that
      time was: who was it that had really sentenced him to death? Not the men
      on the commission that had first examined him—not one of them wished
      to or, evidently, could have done it. It was not Davout, who had looked at
      him in so human a way. In another moment Davout would have realized that
      he was doing wrong, but just then the adjutant had come in and interrupted
      him. The adjutant, also, had evidently had no evil intent though he might
      have refrained from coming in. Then who was executing him, killing him,
      depriving him of life—him, Pierre, with all his memories,
      aspirations, hopes, and thoughts? Who was doing this? And Pierre felt that
      it was no one.
    </p>
<p>
      It was a system—a concurrence of circumstances.
    </p>
<p>
      A system of some sort was killing him—Pierre—depriving him of
      life, of everything, annihilating him.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER XI
    </h3>
<p>
      From Prince Shcherbátov’s house the prisoners were led straight down the
      Virgin’s Field, to the left of the nunnery, as far as a kitchen garden in
      which a post had been set up. Beyond that post a fresh pit had been dug in
      the ground, and near the post and the pit a large crowd stood in a
      semicircle. The crowd consisted of a few Russians and many of Napoleon’s
      soldiers who were not on duty—Germans, Italians, and Frenchmen, in a
      variety of uniforms. To the right and left of the post stood rows of
      French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and high boots and
      shakos.
    </p>
<p>
      The prisoners were placed in a certain order, according to the list
      (Pierre was sixth), and were led to the post. Several drums suddenly began
      to beat on both sides of them, and at that sound Pierre felt as if part of
      his soul had been torn away. He lost the power of thinking or
      understanding. He could only hear and see. And he had only one wish—that
      the frightful thing that had to happen should happen quickly. Pierre
      looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them.
    </p>
<p>
      The two first were convicts with shaven heads. One was tall and thin, the
      other dark, shaggy, and sinewy, with a flat nose. The third was a domestic
      serf, about forty-five years old, with grizzled hair and a plump,
      well-nourished body. The fourth was a peasant, a very handsome man with a
      broad, light-brown beard and black eyes. The fifth was a factory hand, a
      thin, sallow-faced lad of eighteen in a loose coat.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre heard the French consulting whether to shoot them separately or two
      at a time. “In couples,” replied the officer in command in a calm voice.
      There was a stir in the ranks of the soldiers and it was evident that they
      were all hurrying—not as men hurry to do something they understand,
      but as people hurry to finish a necessary but unpleasant and
      incomprehensible task.
    </p>
<p>
      A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row of
      prisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French.
    </p>
<p>
      Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at the officer’s
      command took the two convicts who stood first in the row. The convicts
      stopped when they reached the post and, while sacks were being brought,
      looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approaching huntsman.
      One crossed himself continually, the other scratched his back and made a
      movement of the lips resembling a smile. With hurried hands the soldiers
      blindfolded them, drawing the sacks over their heads, and bound them to
      the post.
    </p>
<p>
      Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firm
      regular tread and halted eight paces from the post. Pierre turned away to
      avoid seeing what was going to happen. Suddenly a crackling, rolling noise
      was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific thunder, and
      he looked round. There was some smoke, and the Frenchmen were doing
      something near the pit, with pale faces and trembling hands. Two more
      prisoners were led up. In the same way and with similar looks, these two
      glanced vainly at the onlookers with only a silent appeal for protection
      in their eyes, evidently unable to understand or believe what was going to
      happen to them. They could not believe it because they alone knew what
      their life meant to them, and so they neither understood nor believed that
      it could be taken from them.
    </p>
<p>
      Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away; but again the
      sound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear, and at the same moment
      he saw smoke, blood, and the pale, scared faces of the Frenchmen who were
      again doing something by the post, their trembling hands impeding one
      another. Pierre, breathing heavily, looked around as if asking what it
      meant. The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his.
    </p>
<p>
      On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officers
      without exception, he read the same dismay, horror, and conflict that were
      in his own heart. “But who, after all, is doing this? They are all
      suffering as I am. Who then is it? Who?” flashed for an instant through
      his mind.
    </p>
<p>
      “Sharpshooters of the 86th, forward!” shouted someone. The fifth prisoner,
      the one next to Pierre, was led away—alone. Pierre did not
      understand that he was saved, that he and the rest had been brought there
      only to witness the execution. With ever-growing horror, and no sense of
      joy or relief, he gazed at what was taking place. The fifth man was the
      factory lad in the loose cloak. The moment they laid hands on him he
      sprang aside in terror and clutched at Pierre. (Pierre shuddered and shook
      himself free.) The lad was unable to walk. They dragged him along, holding
      him up under the arms, and he screamed. When they got him to the post he
      grew quiet, as if he suddenly understood something. Whether he understood
      that screaming was useless or whether he thought it incredible that men
      should kill him, at any rate he took his stand at the post, waiting to be
      blindfolded like the others, and like a wounded animal looked around him
      with glittering eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes. His curiosity
      and agitation, like that of the whole crowd, reached the highest pitch at
      this fifth murder. Like the others this fifth man seemed calm; he wrapped
      his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other.
    </p>
<p>
      When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which hurt
      the back of his head; then when they propped him against the bloodstained
      post, he leaned back and, not being comfortable in that position,
      straightened himself, adjusted his feet, and leaned back again more
      comfortably. Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss his
      slightest movement.
    </p>
<p>
      Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports of
      eight muskets; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards remember
      having heard the slightest sound of the shots. He only saw how the workman
      suddenly sank down on the cords that held him, how blood showed itself in
      two places, how the ropes slackened under the weight of the hanging body,
      and how the workman sat down, his head hanging unnaturally and one leg
      bent under him. Pierre ran up to the post. No one hindered him. Pale,
      frightened people were doing something around the workman. The lower jaw
      of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he untied the ropes.
      The body collapsed. The soldiers dragged it awkwardly from the post and
      began pushing it into the pit.
    </p>
<p>
      They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must hide
      the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying with
      his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other.
      That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively, but spadefuls
      of earth were already being thrown over the whole body. One of the
      soldiers, evidently suffering, shouted gruffly and angrily at Pierre to go
      back. But Pierre did not understand him and remained near the post, and no
      one drove him away.
    </p>
<p>
      When the pit had been filled up a command was given. Pierre was taken back
      to his place, and the rows of troops on both sides of the post made a half
      turn and went past it at a measured pace. The twenty-four sharpshooters
      with discharged muskets, standing in the center of the circle, ran back to
      their places as the companies passed by.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran in couples
      out of the circle. All but one rejoined their companies. This one, a young
      soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushed back, and his musket
      resting on the ground, still stood near the pit at the spot from which he
      had fired. He swayed like a drunken man, taking some steps forward and
      back to save himself from falling. An old, noncommissioned officer ran out
      of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him to his company. The
      crowd of Russians and Frenchmen began to disperse. They all went away
      silently and with drooping heads.
    </p>
<p>
      “That will teach them to start fires,” said one of the Frenchmen.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who was
      trying to find some relief after what had been done, but was not able to
      do so. Without finishing what he had begun to say he made a hopeless
      movement with his arm and went away.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER XII
    </h3>
<p>
      After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisoners
      and placed alone in a small, ruined, and befouled church.
    </p>
<p>
      Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and
      told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks for
      the prisoners of war. Without understanding what was said to him, Pierre
      got up and went with the soldiers. They took him to the upper end of the
      field, where there were some sheds built of charred planks, beams, and
      battens, and led him into one of them. In the darkness some twenty
      different men surrounded Pierre. He looked at them without understanding
      who they were, why they were there, or what they wanted of him. He heard
      what they said, but did not understand the meaning of the words and made
      no kind of deduction from or application of them. He replied to questions
      they put to him, but did not consider who was listening to his replies,
      nor how they would understand them. He looked at their faces and figures,
      but they all seemed to him equally meaningless.
    </p>
<p>
      From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murders committed by
      men who did not wish to commit them, it was as if the mainspring of his
      life, on which everything depended and which made everything appear alive,
      had suddenly been wrenched out and everything had collapsed into a heap of
      meaningless rubbish. Though he did not acknowledge it to himself, his
      faith in the right ordering of the universe, in humanity, in his own soul,
      and in God, had been destroyed. He had experienced this before, but never
      so strongly as now. When similar doubts had assailed him before, they had
      been the result of his own wrongdoing, and at the bottom of his heart he
      had felt that relief from his despair and from those doubts was to be
      found within himself. But now he felt that the universe had crumbled
      before his eyes and only meaningless ruins remained, and this not by any
      fault of his own. He felt that it was not in his power to regain faith in
      the meaning of life.
    </p>
<p>
      Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently something about
      him interested them greatly. They were telling him something and asking
      him something. Then they led him away somewhere, and at last he found
      himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughing and talking on
      all sides.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, then, mates... that very prince <i>who</i>...” some voice at
      the other end of the shed was saying, with a strong emphasis on the word <i>who</i>.
    </p>
<p>
      Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall, Pierre
      sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes. But as soon as he closed
      them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory lad—especially
      dreadful because of its simplicity—and the faces of the murderers,
      even more dreadful because of their disquiet. And he opened his eyes again
      and stared vacantly into the darkness around him.
    </p>
<p>
      Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whose presence he was
      first made aware by a strong smell of perspiration which came from him
      every time he moved. This man was doing something to his legs in the
      darkness, and though Pierre could not see his face he felt that the man
      continually glanced at him. On growing used to the darkness Pierre saw
      that the man was taking off his leg bands, and the way he did it aroused
      Pierre’s interest.
    </p>
<p>
      Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg, he carefully
      coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg, glancing up at
      Pierre. While one hand hung up the first string the other was already
      unwinding the band on the second leg. In this way, having carefully
      removed the leg bands by deft circular motions of his arm following one
      another uninterruptedly, the man hung the leg bands up on some pegs fixed
      above his head. Then he took out a knife, cut something, closed the knife,
      placed it under the head of his bed, and, seating himself comfortably,
      clasped his arms round his lifted knees and fixed his eyes on Pierre. The
      latter was conscious of something pleasant, comforting, and well-rounded
      in these deft movements, in the man’s well-ordered arrangements in his
      corner, and even in his very smell, and he looked at the man without
      taking his eyes from him.
    </p>
<p>
      “You’ve seen a lot of trouble, sir, eh?” the little man suddenly said.
    </p>
<p>
      And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voice that
      Pierre tried to reply, but his jaw trembled and he felt tears rising to
      his eyes. The little fellow, giving Pierre no time to betray his
      confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasant tones:
    </p>
<p>
      “Eh, lad, don’t fret!” said he, in the tender singsong caressing voice old
      Russian peasant women employ. “Don’t fret, friend—‘suffer an hour,
      live for an age!’ that’s how it is, my dear fellow. And here we live,
      thank heaven, without offense. Among these folk, too, there are good men
      as well as bad,” said he, and still speaking, he turned on his knees with
      a supple movement, got up, coughed, and went off to another part of the
      shed.
    </p>
<p>
      “Eh, you rascal!” Pierre heard the same kind voice saying at the other end
      of the shed. “So you’ve come, you rascal? She remembers... Now, now,
      that’ll do!”
     </p>
<p>
      And the soldier, pushing away a little dog that was jumping up at him,
      returned to his place and sat down. In his hands he had something wrapped
      in a rag.
    </p>
<p>
      “Here, eat a bit, sir,” said he, resuming his former respectful tone as he
      unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes. “We had soup for dinner
      and the potatoes are grand!”
     </p>
<p>
      Pierre had not eaten all day and the smell of the potatoes seemed
      extremely pleasant to him. He thanked the soldier and began to eat.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, are they all right?” said the soldier with a smile. “You should do
      like this.”
     </p>
<p>
      He took a potato, drew out his clasp knife, cut the potato into two equal
      halves on the palm of his hand, sprinkled some salt on it from the rag,
      and handed it to Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      “The potatoes are grand!” he said once more. “Eat some like that!”
     </p>
<p>
      Pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better.
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, I’m all right,” said he, “but why did they shoot those poor fellows?
      The last one was hardly twenty.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Tss, tt...!” said the little man. “Ah, what a sin... what a sin!” he
      added quickly, and as if his words were always waiting ready in his mouth
      and flew out involuntarily he went on: “How was it, sir, that you stayed
      in Moscow?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I didn’t think they would come so soon. I stayed accidentally,” replied
      Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      “And how did they arrest you, dear lad? At your house?”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, I went to look at the fire, and they arrested me there, and tried me
      as an incendiary.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Where there’s law there’s injustice,” put in the little man.
    </p>
<p>
      “And have you been here long?” Pierre asked as he munched the last of the
      potato.
    </p>
<p>
      “I? It was last Sunday they took me, out of a hospital in Moscow.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why, are you a soldier then?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, we are soldiers of the Ápsheron regiment. I was dying of fever. We
      weren’t told anything. There were some twenty of us lying there. We had no
      idea, never guessed at all.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And do you feel sad here?” Pierre inquired.
    </p>
<p>
      “How can one help it, lad? My name is Platón, and the surname is
      Karatáev,” he added, evidently wishing to make it easier for Pierre to
      address him. “They call me ‘little falcon’ in the regiment. How is one to
      help feeling sad? Moscow—she’s the mother of cities. How can one see
      all this and not feel sad? But ‘the maggot gnaws the cabbage, yet dies
      first’; that’s what the old folks used to tell us,” he added rapidly.
    </p>
<p>
      “What? What did you say?” asked Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      “Who? I?” said Karatáev. “I say things happen not as we plan but as God
      judges,” he replied, thinking that he was repeating what he had said
      before, and immediately continued:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, and you, have you a family estate, sir? And a house? So you have
      abundance, then? And a housewife? And your old parents, are they still
      living?” he asked.
    </p>
<p>
      And though it was too dark for Pierre to see, he felt that a suppressed
      smile of kindliness puckered the soldier’s lips as he put these questions.
      He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents, especially that he had no
      mother.
    </p>
<p>
      “A wife for counsel, a mother-in-law for welcome, but there’s none as dear
      as one’s own mother!” said he. “Well, and have you little ones?” he went
      on asking.
    </p>
<p>
      Again Pierre’s negative answer seemed to distress him, and he hastened to
      add:
    </p>
<p>
      “Never mind! You’re young folks yet, and please God may still have some.
      The great thing is to live in harmony....”
     </p>
<p>
      “But it’s all the same now,” Pierre could not help saying.
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah, my dear fellow!” rejoined Karatáev, “never decline a prison or a
      beggar’s sack!”
     </p>
<p>
      He seated himself more comfortably and coughed, evidently preparing to
      tell a long story.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, my dear fellow, I was still living at home,” he began. “We had a
      well-to-do homestead, plenty of land, we peasants lived well and our house
      was one to thank God for. When Father and we went out mowing there were
      seven of us. We lived well. We were real peasants. It so happened...”
     </p>
<p>
      And Platón Karatáev told a long story of how he had gone into someone’s
      copse to take wood, how he had been caught by the keeper, had been tried,
      flogged, and sent to serve as a soldier.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, lad,” and a smile changed the tone of his voice “we thought it was
      a misfortune but it turned out a blessing! If it had not been for my sin,
      my brother would have had to go as a soldier. But he, my younger brother,
      had five little ones, while I, you see, only left a wife behind. We had a
      little girl, but God took her before I went as a soldier. I come home on
      leave and I’ll tell you how it was, I look and see that they are living
      better than before. The yard full of cattle, the women at home, two
      brothers away earning wages, and only Michael the youngest, at home.
      Father, he says, ‘All my children are the same to me: it hurts the same
      whichever finger gets bitten. But if Platón hadn’t been shaved for a
      soldier, Michael would have had to go.’ called us all to him and, will you
      believe it, placed us in front of the icons. ‘Michael,’ he says, ‘come
      here and bow down to his feet; and you, young woman, you bow down too; and
      you, grandchildren, also bow down before him! Do you understand?’ he says.
      That’s how it is, dear fellow. Fate looks for a head. But we are always
      judging, ‘that’s not well—that’s not right!’ Our luck is like water
      in a dragnet: you pull at it and it bulges, but when you’ve drawn it out
      it’s empty! That’s how it is.”
     </p>
<p>
      And Platón shifted his seat on the straw.
    </p>
<p>
      After a short silence he rose.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, I think you must be sleepy,” said he, and began rapidly crossing
      himself and repeating:
    </p>
<p>
      “Lord Jesus Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus
      Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus Christ, have
      mercy on us and save us!” he concluded, then bowed to the ground, got up,
      sighed, and sat down again on his heap of straw. “That’s the way. Lay me
      down like a stone, O God, and raise me up like a loaf,” he muttered as he
      lay down, pulling his coat over him.
    </p>
<p>
      “What prayer was that you were saying?” asked Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      “Eh?” murmured Platón, who had almost fallen asleep. “What was I saying? I
      was praying. Don’t you pray?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, I do,” said Pierre. “But what was that you said: Frola and Lavra?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, of course,” replied Platón quickly, “the horses’ saints. One must
      pity the animals too. Eh, the rascal! Now you’ve curled up and got warm,
      you daughter of a bitch!” said Karatáev, touching the dog that lay at his
      feet, and again turning over he fell asleep immediately.
    </p>
<p>
      Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distance
      outside, and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed, but
      inside it was quiet and dark. For a long time Pierre did not sleep, but
      lay with eyes open in the darkness, listening to the regular snoring of
      Platón who lay beside him, and he felt that the world that had been
      shattered was once more stirring in his soul with a new beauty and on new
      and unshakable foundations.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER XIII
    </h3>
<p>
      Twenty-three soldiers, three officers, and two officials were confined in
      the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where he remained for four
      weeks.
    </p>
<p>
      When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figures to
      him except Platón Karatáev, who always remained in his mind a most vivid
      and precious memory and the personification of everything Russian, kindly,
      and round. When Pierre saw his neighbor next morning at dawn the first
      impression of him, as of something round, was fully confirmed: Platón’s
      whole figure—in a French overcoat girdled with a cord, a soldier’s
      cap, and bast shoes—was round. His head was quite round, his back,
      chest, shoulders, and even his arms, which he held as if ever ready to
      embrace something, were rounded, his pleasant smile and his large, gentle
      brown eyes were also round.
    </p>
<p>
      Platón Karatáev must have been fifty, judging by his stories of campaigns
      he had been in, told as by an old soldier. He did not himself know his age
      and was quite unable to determine it. But his brilliantly white, strong
      teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when he laughed—as he
      often did—were all sound and good, there was not a gray hair in his
      beard or on his head, and his whole body gave an impression of suppleness
      and especially of firmness and endurance.
    </p>
<p>
      His face, despite its fine, rounded wrinkles, had an expression of
      innocence and youth, his voice was pleasant and musical. But the chief
      peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness. It was
      evident that he never considered what he had said or was going to say, and
      consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had an
      irresistible persuasiveness.
    </p>
<p>
      His physical strength and agility during the first days of his
      imprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue and
      sickness meant. Every night before lying down, he said: “Lord, lay me down
      as a stone and raise me up as a loaf!” and every morning on getting up, he
      said: “I lay down and curled up, I get up and shake myself.” And indeed he
      only had to lie down, to fall asleep like a stone, and he only had to
      shake himself, to be ready without a moment’s delay for some work, just as
      children are ready to play directly they awake. He could do everything,
      not very well but not badly. He baked, cooked, sewed, planed, and mended
      boots. He was always busy, and only at night allowed himself conversation—of
      which he was fond—and songs. He did not sing like a trained singer
      who knows he is listened to, but like the birds, evidently giving vent to
      the sounds in the same way that one stretches oneself or walks about to
      get rid of stiffness, and the sounds were always high-pitched, mournful,
      delicate, and almost feminine, and his face at such times was very
      serious.
    </p>
<p>
      Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow, he seemed to
      have thrown off all that had been forced upon him—everything
      military and alien to himself—and had returned to his former peasant
      habits.
    </p>
<p>
      “A soldier on leave—a shirt outside breeches,” he would say.
    </p>
<p>
      He did not like talking about his life as a soldier, though he did not
      complain, and often mentioned that he had not been flogged once during the
      whole of his army service. When he related anything it was generally some
      old and evidently precious memory of his “Christian” life, as he called
      his peasant existence. The proverbs, of which his talk was full, were for
      the most part not the coarse and indecent saws soldiers employ, but those
      folk sayings which taken without a context seem so insignificant, but when
      used appositely suddenly acquire a significance of profound wisdom.
    </p>
<p>
      He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previous
      occasion, yet both would be right. He liked to talk and he talked well,
      adorning his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayings which
      Pierre thought he invented himself, but the chief charm of his talk lay in
      the fact that the commonest events—sometimes just such as Pierre had
      witnessed without taking notice of them—assumed in Karatáev’s a
      character of solemn fitness. He liked to hear the folk tales one of the
      soldiers used to tell of an evening (they were always the same), but most
      of all he liked to hear stories of real life. He would smile joyfully when
      listening to such stories, now and then putting in a word or asking a
      question to make the moral beauty of what he was told clear to himself.
      Karatáev had no attachments, friendships, or love, as Pierre understood
      them, but loved and lived affectionately with everything life brought him
      in contact with, particularly with man—not any particular man, but
      those with whom he happened to be. He loved his dog, his comrades, the
      French, and Pierre who was his neighbor, but Pierre felt that in spite of
      Karatáev’s affectionate tenderness for him (by which he unconsciously gave
      Pierre’s spiritual life its due) he would not have grieved for a moment at
      parting from him. And Pierre began to feel in the same way toward
      Karatáev.
    </p>
<p>
      To all the other prisoners Platón Karatáev seemed a most ordinary soldier.
      They called him “little falcon” or “Platósha,” chaffed
      him good-naturedly, and sent him on errands. But to Pierre he always remained
      what he had seemed that first night: an unfathomable, rounded, eternal
      personification of the spirit of simplicity and truth.
    </p>
<p>
      Platón Karatáev knew nothing by heart except his prayers. When he began to
      speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude.
    </p>
<p>
      Sometimes Pierre, struck by the meaning of his words, would ask him to
      repeat them, but Platón could never recall what he had said a moment
      before, just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of his favorite
      song: <i>native</i> and <i>birch tree</i> and <i>my heart is sick</i> occurred in
      it, but when spoken and not sung, no meaning could be got out of it. He did not,
      and could not, understand the meaning of words apart from their context. Every
      word and action of his was the manifestation of an activity unknown to
      him, which was his life. But his life, as he regarded it, had no meaning
      as a separate thing. It had meaning only as part of a whole of which he
      was always conscious. His words and actions flowed from him as evenly,
      inevitably, and spontaneously as fragrance exhales from a flower. He could
      not understand the value or significance of any word or deed taken
      separately.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER XIV
    </h3>
<p>
      When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with the
      Rostóvs at Yaroslávl she at once prepared to go there, in spite of her
      aunt’s efforts to dissuade her—and not merely to go herself but to
      take her nephew with her. Whether it were difficult or easy, possible or
      impossible, she did not ask and did not want to know: it was her duty, not
      only to herself, to be near her brother who was perhaps dying, but to do
      everything possible to take his son to him, and so she prepared to set
      off. That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself, Princess Mary
      attributed to his being too weak to write or to his considering the long
      journey too hard and too dangerous for her and his son.
    </p>
<p>
      In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start. Her equipages were the
      huge family coach in which she had traveled to Vorónezh, a semiopen trap,
      and a baggage cart. With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne, little
      Nicholas and his tutor, her old nurse, three maids, Tíkhon, and a young
      footman and courier her aunt had sent to accompany her.
    </p>
<p>
      The usual route through Moscow could not be thought of, and the roundabout
      way Princess Mary was obliged to take through Lípetsk, Ryazán, Vladímir,
      and Shúya was very long and, as post horses were not everywhere
      obtainable, very difficult, and near Ryazán where the French were said to
      have shown themselves was even dangerous.
    </p>
<p>
      During this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne, Dessalles, and
      Princess Mary’s servants were astonished at her energy and firmness of
      spirit. She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them, and no
      difficulties daunted her. Thanks to her activity and energy, which
      infected her fellow travelers, they approached Yaroslávl by the end of the
      second week.
    </p>
<p>
      The last days of her stay in Vorónezh had been the happiest of her life.
      Her love for Rostóv no longer tormented or agitated her. It filled her
      whole soul, had become an integral part of herself, and she no longer
      struggled against it. Latterly she had become convinced that she loved and
      was beloved, though she never said this definitely to herself in words.
      She had become convinced of it at her last interview with Nicholas, when
      he had come to tell her that her brother was with the Rostóvs. Not by a
      single word had Nicholas alluded to the fact that Prince Andrew’s
      relations with Natásha might, if he recovered, be renewed, but Princess
      Mary saw by his face that he knew and thought of this.
    </p>
<p>
      Yet in spite of that, his relation to her—considerate, delicate, and
      loving—not only remained unchanged, but it sometimes seemed to
      Princess Mary that he was even glad that the family connection between
      them allowed him to express his friendship more freely. She knew that she
      loved for the first and only time in her life and felt that she was
      beloved, and was happy in regard to it.
    </p>
<p>
      But this happiness on one side of her spiritual nature did not prevent her
      feeling grief for her brother with full force; on the contrary, that
      spiritual tranquility on the one side made it the more possible for her to
      give full play to her feeling for her brother. That feeling was so strong
      at the moment of leaving Vorónezh that those who saw her off, as they
      looked at her careworn, despairing face, felt sure she would fall ill on
      the journey. But the very difficulties and preoccupations of the journey,
      which she took so actively in hand, saved her for a while from her grief
      and gave her strength.
    </p>
<p>
      As always happens when traveling, Princess Mary thought only of the
      journey itself, forgetting its object. But as she approached Yaroslávl the
      thought of what might await her there—not after many days, but that
      very evening—again presented itself to her and her agitation
      increased to its utmost limit.
    </p>
<p>
      The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where the Rostóvs
      were staying in Yaroslávl, and in what condition Prince Andrew was, when
      he met the big coach just entering the town gates was appalled by the
      terrible pallor of the princess’ face that looked out at him from the
      window.
    </p>
<p>
      “I have found out everything, your excellency: the Rostóvs are staying at
      the merchant Brónnikov’s house, in the Square not far from here, right
      above the Vólga,” said the courier.
    </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary looked at him with frightened inquiry, not understanding why
      he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know: how was her brother?
      Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her.
    </p>
<p>
      “How is the prince?” she asked.
    </p>
<p>
      “His excellency is staying in the same house with them.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Then he is alive,” thought Princess Mary, and asked in a low voice: “How
      is he?”
     </p>
<p>
      “The servants say he is still the same.”
     </p>
<p>
      What “still the same” might mean Princess Mary did not ask, but with an
      unnoticed glance at little seven-year-old Nicholas, who was sitting in
      front of her looking with pleasure at the town, she bowed her head and did
      not raise it again till the heavy coach, rumbling, shaking and swaying,
      came to a stop. The carriage steps clattered as they were let down.
    </p>
<p>
      The carriage door was opened. On the left there was water—a great
      river—and on the right a porch. There were people at the entrance:
      servants, and a rosy girl with a large plait of black hair, smiling as it
      seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way. (This was Sónya.)
      Princess Mary ran up the steps. “This way, this way!” said the girl, with
      the same artificial smile, and the princess found herself in the hall
      facing an elderly woman of Oriental type, who came rapidly to meet her
      with a look of emotion. This was the countess. She embraced Princess Mary
      and kissed her.
    </p>
<p>
<i>“Mon enfant!”</i> she muttered, <i>“je vous aime et vous
      connais depuis longtemps.”</i> *
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
    * “My child! I love you and have known you a long time.”
 </pre>
<p>
      Despite her excitement, Princess Mary realized that this was the
      countess and that it was necessary to say something to her. Hardly
      knowing how she did it, she contrived to utter a few polite phrases in
      French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her, and
      asked: “How is he?”
    </p>
<p>
      “The doctor says that he is not in danger,” said the countess, but as she
      spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh, and her gesture conveyed a
      contradiction of her words.
    </p>
<p>
      “Where is he? Can I see him—can I?” asked the princess.
    </p>
<p>
      “One moment, Princess, one moment, my dear! Is this his son?” said the
      countess, turning to little Nicholas who was coming in with Dessalles.
      “There will be room for everybody, this is a big house. Oh, what a lovely
      boy!”
     </p>
<p>
      The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room, where Sónya was
      talking to Mademoiselle Bourienne. The countess caressed the boy, and the
      old count came in and welcomed the princess. He had changed very much
      since Princess Mary had last seen him. Then he had been a brisk, cheerful,
      self-assured old man; now he seemed a pitiful, bewildered person. While
      talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as if asking everyone
      whether he was doing the right thing. After the destruction of Moscow and
      of his property, thrown out of his accustomed groove he seemed to have
      lost the sense of his own significance and to feel that there was no
      longer a place for him in life.
    </p>
<p>
      In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible, and her
      vexation that at the moment when all she wanted was to see him they should
      be trying to entertain her and pretending to admire her nephew, the
      princess noticed all that was going on around her and felt the necessity
      of submitting, for a time, to this new order of things which she had
      entered. She knew it to be necessary, and though it was hard for her she
      was not vexed with these people.
    </p>
<p>
      “This is my niece,” said the count, introducing Sónya—“You don’t
      know her, Princess?”
     </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary turned to Sónya and, trying to stifle the hostile feeling
      that arose in her toward the girl, she kissed her. But she felt oppressed
      by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so far from what was
      in her own heart.
    </p>
<p>
      “Where is he?” she asked again, addressing them all.
    </p>
<p>
      “He is downstairs. Natásha is with him,” answered Sónya, flushing. “We
      have sent to ask. I think you must be tired, Princess.”
     </p>
<p>
      Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary’s eyes. She turned
      away and was about to ask the countess again how to go to him, when light,
      impetuous, and seemingly buoyant steps were heard at the door. The
      princess looked round and saw Natásha coming in, almost running—that
      Natásha whom she had liked so little at their meeting in Moscow long
      since.
    </p>
<p>
      But hardly had the princess looked at Natásha’s face before she realized
      that here was a real comrade in her grief, and consequently a friend. She
      ran to meet her, embraced her, and began to cry on her shoulder.
    </p>
<p>
      As soon as Natásha, sitting at the head of Prince Andrew’s bed, heard of
      Princess Mary’s arrival, she softly left his room and hastened to her with
      those swift steps that had sounded buoyant to Princess Mary.
    </p>
<p>
      There was only one expression on her agitated face when she ran into the
      drawing room—that of love—boundless love for him, for her, and
      for all that was near to the man she loved; and of pity, suffering for
      others, and passionate desire to give herself entirely to helping them. It
      was plain that at that moment there was in Natásha’s heart no thought of
      herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew.
    </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary, with her acute sensibility, understood all this at the
      first glance at Natásha’s face, and wept on her shoulder with sorrowful
      pleasure.
    </p>
<p>
      “Come, come to him, Mary,” said Natásha, leading her into the other room.
    </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary raised her head, dried her eyes, and turned to Natásha. She
      felt that from her she would be able to understand and learn everything.
    </p>
<p>
      “How...” she began her question but stopped short.
    </p>
<p>
      She felt that it was impossible to ask, or to answer, in words. Natásha’s
      face and eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and profoundly.
    </p>
<p>
      Natásha was gazing at her, but seemed afraid and in doubt whether to say
      all she knew or not; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyes
      which penetrated into the very depths of her heart, it was impossible not
      to tell the whole truth which she saw. And suddenly, Natásha’s lips
      twitched, ugly wrinkles gathered round her mouth, and covering her face
      with her hands she burst into sobs.
    </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary understood.
    </p>
<p>
      But she still hoped, and asked, in words she herself did not trust:
    </p>
<p>
      “But how is his wound? What is his general condition?”
     </p>
<p>
      “You, you... will see,” was all Natásha could say.
    </p>
<p>
      They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left off
      crying and were able to go to him with calm faces.
    </p>
<p>
      “How has his whole illness gone? Is it long since he grew worse? When did
      this happen?” Princess Mary inquired.
    </p>
<p>
      Natásha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverish
      condition and the pain he suffered, but at Tróitsa that had passed and the
      doctor had only been afraid of gangrene. That danger had also passed. When
      they reached Yaroslávl the wound had begun to fester (Natásha knew all
      about such things as festering) and the doctor had said that the festering
      might take a normal course. Then fever set in, but the doctor had said the
      fever was not very serious.
    </p>
<p>
      “But two days ago <i>this</i> suddenly happened,” said Natásha, struggling with
      her sobs. “I don’t know why, but you will see what he is like.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Is he weaker? Thinner?” asked the princess.
    </p>
<p>
      “No, it’s not that, but worse. You will see. O, Mary, he is too good, he
      cannot, cannot live, because...”
     </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER XV
    </h3>
<p>
      When Natásha opened Prince Andrew’s door with a familiar movement and let
      Princess Mary pass into the room before her, the princess felt the sobs in
      her throat. Hard as she had tried to prepare herself, and now tried to
      remain tranquil, she knew that she would be unable to look at him without
      tears.
    </p>
<p>
      The princess understood what Natásha had meant by the words: “two days ago
      <i>this</i> suddenly happened.” She understood those words to mean that he had
      suddenly softened and that this softening and gentleness were signs of
      approaching death. As she stepped to the door she already saw in
      imagination Andrew’s face as she remembered it in childhood, a gentle,
      mild, sympathetic face which he had rarely shown, and which therefore
      affected her very strongly. She was sure he would speak soft, tender words
      to her such as her father had uttered before his death, and that she would
      not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in his presence. Yet
      sooner or later it had to be, and she went in. The sobs rose higher and
      higher in her throat as she more and more clearly distinguished his form
      and her shortsighted eyes tried to make out his features, and then she saw
      his face and met his gaze.
    </p>
<p>
      He was lying in a squirrel-fur dressing gown on a divan, surrounded by
      pillows. He was thin and pale. In one thin, translucently white hand he
      held a handkerchief, while with the other he stroked the delicate mustache
      he had grown, moving his fingers slowly. His eyes gazed at them as they
      entered.
    </p>
<p>
      On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary’s pace suddenly
      slackened, she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased. She suddenly
      felt guilty and grew timid on catching the expression of his face and
      eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      “But in what am I to blame?” she asked herself. And his cold, stern look
      replied: “Because you are alive and thinking of the living, while I...”
     </p>
<p>
      In the deep gaze that seemed to look not outwards but inwards there was an
      almost hostile expression as he slowly regarded his sister and Natásha.
    </p>
<p>
      He kissed his sister, holding her hand in his as was their wont.
    </p>
<p>
      “How are you, Mary? How did you manage to get here?” said he in a voice as
      calm and aloof as his look.
    </p>
<p>
      Had he screamed in agony, that scream would not have struck such horror
      into Princess Mary’s heart as the tone of his voice.
    </p>
<p>
      “And have you brought little Nicholas?” he asked in the same slow, quiet
      manner and with an obvious effort to remember.
    </p>
<p>
      “How are you now?” said Princess Mary, herself surprised at what she was
      saying.
    </p>
<p>
      “That, my dear, you must ask the doctor,” he replied, and again making an
      evident effort to be affectionate, he said with his lips only (his words
      clearly did not correspond to his thoughts):
    </p>
<p>
<i>“Merci, chère amie, d’être venue.”</i> *
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
    * “Thank you for coming, my dear.”
 </pre>
<p>
      Princess Mary pressed his hand. The pressure made him wince just
      perceptibly. He was silent, and she did not know what to say. She now
      understood what had happened to him two days before. In his words, his
      tone, and especially in that calm, almost antagonistic look could be felt
      an estrangement from everything belonging to this world, terrible in one
      who is alive. Evidently only with an effort did he understand anything
      living; but it was obvious that he failed to understand, not because he
      lacked the power to do so but because he understood something else—something
      the living did not and could not understand—and which wholly
      occupied his mind.
    </p>
<p>
      “There, you see how strangely fate has brought us together,” said he,
      breaking the silence and pointing to Natásha. “She looks after me all the
      time.”
     </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such a
      thing. He, the sensitive, tender Prince Andrew, how could he say that,
      before her whom he loved and who loved him? Had he expected to live he
      could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone. If he had
      not known that he was dying, how could he have failed to pity her and how
      could he speak like that in her presence? The only explanation was that he
      was indifferent, because something else, much more important, had been
      revealed to him.
    </p>
<p>
      The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually broke off.
    </p>
<p>
      “Mary came by way of Ryazán,” said Natásha.
    </p>
<p>
      Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister <i>Mary</i>, and only
      after calling her so in his presence did Natásha notice it herself.
    </p>
<p>
      “Really?” he asked.
    </p>
<p>
      “They told her that all Moscow has been burned down, and that...”
     </p>
<p>
      Natásha stopped. It was impossible to talk. It was plain that he was
      making an effort to listen, but could not do so.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, they say it’s burned,” he said. “It’s a great pity,” and he gazed
      straight before him, absently stroking his mustache with his fingers.
    </p>
<p>
      “And so you have met Count Nicholas, Mary?” Prince Andrew suddenly said,
      evidently wishing to speak pleasantly to them. “He wrote here that he took
      a great liking to you,” he went on simply and calmly, evidently unable to
      understand all the complex significance his words had for living people.
      “If you liked him too, it would be a good thing for you to get married,”
       he added rather more quickly, as if pleased at having found words he had
      long been seeking.
    </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her, except as a
      proof of how far away he now was from everything living.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why talk of me?” she said quietly and glanced at Natásha.
    </p>
<p>
      Natásha, who felt her glance, did not look at her. All three were again
      silent.
    </p>
<p>
      “Andrew, would you like...” Princess Mary suddenly said in a trembling
      voice, “would you like to see little Nicholas? He is always talking about
      you!”
     </p>
<p>
      Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time, but Princess
      Mary, who knew his face so well, saw with horror that he did not smile
      with pleasure or affection for his son, but with quiet, gentle irony
      because he thought she was trying what she believed to be the last means
      of arousing him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, I shall be very glad to see him. Is he quite well?”
     </p>
<p>
      When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew’s room he looked at
      his father with frightened eyes, but did not cry, because no one else was
      crying. Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to say to
      him.
    </p>
<p>
      When Nicholas had been led away, Princess Mary again went up to her
      brother, kissed him, and unable to restrain her tears any longer began to
      cry.
    </p>
<p>
      He looked at her attentively.
    </p>
<p>
      “Is it about Nicholas?” he asked.
    </p>
<p>
      Princess Mary nodded her head, weeping.
    </p>
<p>
      “Mary, you know the Gosp...” but he broke off.
    </p>
<p>
      “What did you say?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Nothing. You mustn’t cry here,” he said, looking at her with the same
      cold expression.
    </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
      When Princess Mary began to cry, he understood that she was crying at the
      thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father. With a great
      effort he tried to return to life and to see things from their point of
      view.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, to them it must seem sad!” he thought. “But how simple it is.
    </p>
<p>
      “The fowls of the air sow not, neither do they reap, yet your Father
      feedeth them,” he said to himself and wished to say to Princess Mary; “but
      no, they will take it their own way, they won’t understand! They can’t
      understand that all those feelings they prize so—all our feelings,
      all those ideas that seem so important to us, are <i>unnecessary</i>. We cannot
      understand one another,” and he remained silent.
    </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
      Prince Andrew’s little son was seven. He could scarcely read, and knew
      nothing. After that day he lived through many things, gaining knowledge,
      observation, and experience, but had he possessed all the faculties he
      afterwards acquired, he could not have had a better or more profound
      understanding of the meaning of the scene he had witnessed between his
      father, Mary, and Natásha, than he had then. He understood it completely,
      and, leaving the room without crying, went silently up to Natásha who had
      come out with him and looked shyly at her with his beautiful, thoughtful
      eyes, then his uplifted, rosy upper lip trembled and leaning his head
      against her he began to cry.
    </p>
<p>
      After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed him and
      either sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary, or to Natásha of whom
      he seemed even fonder than of his aunt, and clung to them quietly and
      shyly.
    </p>
<p>
      When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood what
      Natásha’s face had told her. She did not speak any more to Natásha of
      hopes of saving his life. She took turns with her beside his sofa, and did
      not cry any more, but prayed continually, turning in soul to that Eternal
      and Unfathomable, whose presence above the dying man was now so evident.
    </p>
<!--se:split--><h3>
      CHAPTER XVI
    </h3>
<p>
      Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die, but he felt that he was
      dying and was already half dead. He was conscious of an aloofness from
      everything earthly and a strange and joyous lightness of existence.
      Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming. That inexorable,
      eternal, distant, and unknown the presence of which he had felt
      continually all his life—was now near to him and, by the strange
      lightness he experienced, almost comprehensible and palpable....
    </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
      Formerly he had feared the end. He had twice experienced that terribly
      tormenting fear of death—the end—but now he no longer understood that
      fear.
    </p>
<p>
      He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a top
      before him, and he looked at the fallow field, the bushes, and the sky,
      and knew that he was face to face with death. When he came to himself
      after being wounded and the flower of eternal, unfettered love had
      instantly unfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondage of
      life that had restrained it, he no longer feared death and ceased to
      think about it.
    </p>
<p>
      During the hours of solitude, suffering, and partial delirium he spent
      after he was wounded, the more deeply he penetrated into the new principle
      of eternal love revealed to him, the more he unconsciously detached
      himself from earthly life. To love everything and everybody and always to
      sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone, not to live this
      earthly life. And the more imbued he became with that principle of love,
      the more he renounced life and the more completely he destroyed that
      dreadful barrier which—in the absence of such love—stands
      between life and death. When during those first days he remembered that he
      would have to die, he said to himself: “Well, what of it? So much the
      better!”
     </p>
<p>
      But after the night in Mytíshchi when, half delirious, he had seen her for
      whom he longed appear before him and, having pressed her hand to his lips,
      had shed gentle, happy tears, love for a particular woman again crept
      unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life. And joyful and
      agitating thoughts began to occupy his mind. Recalling the moment at the
      ambulance station when he had seen Kurágin, he could not now regain the
      feeling he then had, but was tormented by the question whether Kurágin was
      alive. And he dared not inquire.
    </p>
<p>
      His illness pursued its normal physical course, but what Natásha referred
      to when she said: “<i>This</i> suddenly happened,” had occurred two
      days before Princess Mary arrived. It was the last spiritual struggle between
      life and death, in which death gained the victory. It was the unexpected
      realization of the fact that he still valued life as presented to him in
      the form of his love for Natásha, and a last, though ultimately
      vanquished, attack of terror before the unknown.
    </p>
<p>
      It was evening. As usual after dinner he was slightly feverish, and his
      thoughts were preternaturally clear. Sónya was sitting by the table. He
      began to doze. Suddenly a feeling of happiness seized him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah, she has come!” thought he.
    </p>
<p>
      And so it was: in Sónya’s place sat Natásha who had just come in
      noiselessly.
    </p>
<p>
      Since she had begun looking after him, he had always experienced this
      physical consciousness of her nearness. She was sitting in an armchair
      placed sideways, screening the light of the candle from him, and was
      knitting a stocking. She had learned to knit stockings since Prince Andrew
      had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sick so well as old nurses
      who knit stockings, and that there is something soothing in the knitting
      of stockings. The needles clicked lightly in her slender, rapidly moving
      hands, and he could clearly see the thoughtful profile of her drooping
      face. She moved, and the ball rolled off her knees. She started, glanced
      round at him, and screening the candle with her hand stooped carefully
      with a supple and exact movement, picked up the ball, and regained her
      former position.
    </p>
<p>
      He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a deep
      breath after stooping, but refrained from doing so and breathed
      cautiously.
    </p>
<p>
      At the Tróitsa monastery they had spoken of the past, and he had told her
      that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which had brought
      them together again, but after that they never spoke of the future.
    </p>
<p>
      “Can it or can it not be?” he now thought as he looked at her and listened
      to the light click of the steel needles. “Can fate have brought me to her
      so strangely only for me to die?... Is it possible that the truth of life
      has been revealed to me only to show me that I have spent my life in
      falsity? I love her more than anything in the world! But what am I to do
      if I love her?” he thought, and he involuntarily groaned, from a habit
      acquired during his sufferings.
    </p>
<p>
      On hearing that sound Natásha put down the stocking, leaned nearer to him,
      and suddenly, noticing his shining eyes, stepped lightly up to him and
      bent over him.
    </p>
<p>
      “You are not asleep?”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, I have been looking at you a long time. I felt you come in. No one
      else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do... that light. I
      want to weep for joy.”
     </p>
<p>
      Natásha drew closer to him. Her face shone with rapturous joy.
    </p>
<p>
      “Natásha, I love you too much! More than anything in the world.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And I!”—She turned away for an instant. “Why too much?” she asked.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why too much?... Well, what do you, what do you feel in your soul, your
      whole soul—shall I live? What do you think?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I am sure of it, sure!” Natásha almost shouted, taking hold of both his
      hands with a passionate movement.
    </p>
<p>
      He remained silent awhile.
    </p>
<p>
      “How good it would be!” and taking her hand he kissed it.
    </p>
<p>
      Natásha felt happy and agitated, but at once remembered that this would
      not do and that he had to be quiet.
    </p>
<p>
      “But you have not slept,” she said, repressing her joy. “Try to sleep...
      please!”
     </p>
<p>
      He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candle and
      sat down again in her former position. Twice she turned and looked at him,
      and her eyes met his beaming at her. She set herself a task on her
      stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished.
    </p>
<p>
      Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep. He did not sleep long and
      suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration.
    </p>
<p>
      As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now
      always occupied his mind—about life and death, and chiefly about
      death. He felt himself nearer to it.
    </p>
<p>
      “Love? What is love?” he thought.
    </p>
<p>
      “Love hinders death. Love is life. All, everything that I understand, I
      understand only because I love. Everything is, everything exists, only
      because I love. Everything is united by it alone. Love is God, and to die
      means that I, a particle of love, shall return to the general and eternal
      source.” These thoughts seemed to him comforting. But they were only
      thoughts. Something was lacking in them, they were not clear, they were
      too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun. And there was the former
      agitation and obscurity. He fell asleep.
    </p>
<p>
      He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in, but that he was
      quite well and unwounded. Many various, indifferent, and insignificant
      people appeared before him. He talked to them and discussed something
      trivial. They were preparing to go away somewhere. Prince Andrew dimly
      realized that all this was trivial and that he had more important cares,
      but he continued to speak, surprising them by empty witticisms. Gradually,
      unnoticed, all these persons began to disappear and a single question,
      that of the closed door, superseded all else. He rose and went to the door
      to bolt and lock it. Everything depended on whether he was, or was not, in
      time to lock it. He went, and tried to hurry, but his legs refused to move
      and he knew he would not be in time to lock the door though he painfully
      strained all his powers. He was seized by an agonizing fear. And that fear
      was the fear of death. <i>It</i> stood behind the door. But just when he was
      clumsily creeping toward the door, that dreadful something on the other
      side was already pressing against it and forcing its way in. Something not
      human—death—was breaking in through that door, and had to be
      kept out. He seized the door, making a final effort to hold it back—to
      lock it was no longer possible—but his efforts were weak and clumsy
      and the door, pushed from behind by that terror, opened and closed again.
    </p>
<p>
      Once again <i>it</i> pushed from outside. His last superhuman efforts were vain
      and both halves of the door noiselessly opened. <i>It</i> entered, and it was
      <i>death</i>, and Prince Andrew died.
    </p>
<p>
      But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep,
      and at the very instant he died, having made an effort, he awoke.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, it was death! I died—and woke up. Yes, death is an awakening!”
       And all at once it grew light in his soul and the veil that had till then
      concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision. He felt as if
      powers till then confined within him had been liberated, and that strange
      lightness did not again leave him.
    </p>
<p>
      When, waking in a cold perspiration, he moved on the divan, Natásha went
      up and asked him what was the matter. He did not answer and looked at her
      strangely, not understanding.
    </p>
<p>
      That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary’s arrival.
      From that day, as the doctor expressed it, the wasting fever assumed a
      malignant character, but what the doctor said did not interest Natásha,
      she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her were more convincing.
    </p>
<p>
      From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrew together with
      his awakening from sleep. And compared to the duration of life it did not
      seem to him slower than an awakening from sleep compared to the duration
      of a dream.
    </p>
<p>
      There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slow
      awakening.
    </p>
<p>
      His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way. Both
      Princess Mary and Natásha, who did not leave him, felt this. They did not
      weep or shudder and during these last days they themselves felt that they
      were not attending on him (he was no longer there, he had left them) but
      on what reminded them most closely of him—his body. Both felt this
      so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not affect
      them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief. Neither in
      his presence nor out of it did they weep, nor did they ever talk to one
      another about him. They felt that they could not express in words what
      they understood.
    </p>
<p>
      They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly, deeper and deeper,
      away from them, and they both knew that this had to be so and that it was
      right.
    </p>
<p>
      He confessed, and received communion: everyone came to take leave of him.
      When they brought his son to him, he pressed his lips to the boy’s and
      turned away, not because he felt it hard and sad (Princess Mary and
      Natásha understood that) but simply because he thought it was all that was
      required of him, but when they told him to bless the boy, he did what was
      demanded and looked round as if asking whether there was anything else he
      should do.
    </p>
<p>
      When the last convulsions of the body, which the spirit was leaving,
      occurred, Princess Mary and Natásha were present.
    </p>
<p>
      “Is it over?” said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutes lain
      motionless, growing cold before them. Natásha went up, looked at the dead
      eyes, and hastened to close them. She closed them but did not kiss them,
      but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him—his body.
    </p>
<p>
      “Where has he gone? Where is he now?...”
     </p>
<p>
      When the body, washed and dressed, lay in the coffin on a table, everyone
      came to take leave of him and they all wept.
    </p>
<p>
      Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painful perplexity.
      The countess and Sónya cried from pity for Natásha and because he was no
      more. The old count cried because he felt that before long, he, too, must
      take the same terrible step.
    </p>
<p>
      Natásha and Princess Mary also wept now, but not because of their own
      personal grief; they wept with a reverent and softening emotion which had
      taken possession of their souls at the consciousness of the simple and
      solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished in their presence.
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
