<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-13" epub:type="chapter">
    			<h3>
      CHAPTER XIII
    </h3>
<p>
      That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkónski set
      off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he would find it and fearing to
      be captured by the French on the way to Krems.
    </p>
<p>
      In Brünn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavy
      baggage was already being dispatched to Olmütz. Near Hetzelsdorf Prince
      Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with
      great haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was so obstructed with
      carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrew took a
      horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander, and hungry and weary, making
      his way past the baggage wagons, rode in search of the commander in chief
      and of his own luggage. Very sinister reports of the position of the army
      reached him as he went along, and the appearance of the troops in their
      disorderly flight confirmed these rumors.
    </p>
<p>
<i>“Cette armée russe que l’or de l’Angleterre a transportée des extrémités
      de l’univers, nous allons lui faire éprouver le même sort—(le sort
      de l’armée d’Ulm).”</i> * He remembered these words in Bonaparte’s address to
      his army at the beginning of the campaign, and they awoke in him
      astonishment at the genius of his hero, a feeling of wounded pride, and a
      hope of glory. “And should there be nothing left but to die?” he thought.
      “Well, if need be, I shall do it no worse than others.”
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     * “That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of
     the earth by English gold, we shall cause to share the same
     fate—(the fate of the army at Ulm).”
 </pre>
<p>
      He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments, carts,
      guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons and vehicles of all kinds
      overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road, three and sometimes
      four abreast. From all sides, behind and before, as far as ear could
      reach, there were the rattle of wheels, the creaking of carts and gun
      carriages, the tramp of horses, the crack of whips, shouts, the urging of
      horses, and the swearing of soldiers, orderlies, and officers. All along
      the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen, some flayed, some
      not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers sat waiting for
      something, and again soldiers straggling from their companies, crowds of
      whom set off to the neighboring villages, or returned from them dragging
      sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. At each ascent or descent of the
      road the crowds were yet denser and the din of shouting more incessant.
      Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud pushed the guns and wagons
      themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped, traces broke, and lungs were
      strained with shouting. The officers directing the march rode backward and
      forward between the carts. Their voices were but feebly heard amid the
      uproar and one saw by their faces that they despaired of the possibility
      of checking this disorder.
    </p>
<p>
      “Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army,” thought Bolkónski, recalling
      Bilíbin’s words.
    </p>
<p>
      Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was, he rode up to a
      convoy. Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle,
      evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and looking
      like something between a cart, a cabriolet, and a <i>calèche</i>. A soldier was
      driving, and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the apron under the
      leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up and was just putting
      his question to a soldier when his attention was diverted by the desperate
      shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. An officer in charge of transport was
      beating the soldier who was driving the woman’s vehicle for trying to get
      ahead of others, and the strokes of his whip fell on the apron of the
      equipage. The woman screamed piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned
      out from behind the apron and, waving her thin arms from under the woolen
      shawl, cried:
    </p>
<p>
      “Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven’s sake... Protect me!
      What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh
      Chasseurs.... They won’t let us pass, we are left behind and have lost our
      people...”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’ll flatten you into a pancake!” shouted the angry officer to the
      soldier. “Turn back with your slut!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?” screamed the
      doctor’s wife.
    </p>
<p>
      “Kindly let this cart pass. Don’t you see it’s a woman?” said Prince
      Andrew riding up to the officer.
    </p>
<p>
      The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again to the
      soldier. “I’ll teach you to push on!... Back!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Let them pass, I tell you!” repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his lips.
    </p>
<p>
      “And who are you?” cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy rage, “who
      are <i>you?</i> Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here, not you! Go
      back or I’ll flatten you into a pancake,” repeated he. This expression
      evidently pleased him.
    </p>
<p>
      “That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp,” came a voice from
      behind.
    </p>
<p>
      Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless, tipsy
      rage when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that his
      championship of the doctor’s wife in her queer trap might expose him to
      what he dreaded more than anything in the world—to ridicule; but his
      instinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentence Prince
      Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised his riding
      whip.
    </p>
<p>
      “Kind...ly let—them—pass!”
     </p>
<p>
      The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there’s this
      disorder,” he muttered. “Do as you like.”
     </p>
<p>
      Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the doctor’s
      wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with a sense of
      disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene he galloped on to
      the village where he was told who the commander in chief was.
    </p>
<p>
      On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,
      intending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try to sort out
      the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind. “This is a
      mob of scoundrels and not an army,” he was thinking as he went up to the
      window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by name.
    </p>
<p>
      He turned round. Nesvítski’s handsome face looked out of the little
      window. Nesvítski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, and
      flourishing his arm, called him to enter.
    </p>
<p>
      “Bolkónski! Bolkónski!... Don’t you hear? Eh? Come quick...” he shouted.
    </p>
<p>
      Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvítski and another adjutant
      having something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if he had
      any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm. This was
      particularly noticeable on Nesvítski’s usually laughing countenance.
    </p>
<p>
      “Where is the commander in chief?” asked Bolkónski.
    </p>
<p>
      “Here, in that house,” answered the adjutant.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, is it true that it’s peace and capitulation?” asked Nesvítski.
    </p>
<p>
      “I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I could do
      to get here.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And we, my dear boy! It’s terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack, we’re
      getting it still worse,” said Nesvítski. “But sit down and have something
      to eat.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You won’t be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,
      Prince. And God only knows where your man Peter is,” said the other
      adjutant.
    </p>
<p>
      “Where are headquarters?”
     </p>
<p>
      “We are to spend the night in Znaim.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses,” said Nesvítski.
      “They’ve made up splendid packs for me—fit to cross the Bohemian
      mountains with. It’s a bad lookout, old fellow! But what’s the matter with
      you? You must be ill to shiver like that,” he added, noticing that Prince
      Andrew winced as at an electric shock.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s nothing,” replied Prince Andrew.
    </p>
<p>
      He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor’s wife and the
      convoy officer.
    </p>
<p>
      “What is the commander in chief doing here?” he asked.
    </p>
<p>
      “I can’t make out at all,” said Nesvítski.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable, abominable,
      quite abominable!” said Prince Andrew, and he went off to the house where
      the commander in chief was.
    </p>
<p>
      Passing by Kutúzov’s carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of his
      suite, with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, Prince Andrew
      entered the passage. Kutúzov himself, he was told, was in the house with
      Prince Bagratión and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austrian general who had
      succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little Kozlóvski was squatting on his
      heels in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turned up, was hastily
      writing at a tub turned bottom upwards. Kozlóvski’s face looked worn—he
      too had evidently not slept all night. He glanced at Prince Andrew and did
      not even nod to him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Second line... have you written it?” he continued dictating to the clerk.
      “The Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian...”
     </p>
<p>
      “One can’t write so fast, your honor,” said the clerk, glancing
      angrily and disrespectfully at Kozlóvski.
    </p>
<p>
      Through the door came the sounds of Kutúzov’s voice, excited and
      dissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From the sound
      of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlóvski looked at him, the
      disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the clerk and
      Kozlóvski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the commander in
      chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the horses near
      the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and disastrous was
      about to happen.
    </p>
<p>
      He turned to Kozlóvski with urgent questions.
    </p>
<p>
      “Immediately, Prince,” said Kozlóvski. “Dispositions for Bagratión.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What about capitulation?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle.”
     </p>
<p>
      Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard. Just as
      he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened, and Kutúzov
      with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway. Prince Andrew
      stood right in front of Kutúzov but the expression of the commander in
      chief’s one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied with thoughts and
      anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence. He looked straight at his
      adjutant’s face without recognizing him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, have you finished?” said he to Kozlóvski.
    </p>
<p>
      “One moment, your excellency.”
     </p>
<p>
      Bagratión, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm, impassive
      face of Oriental type, came out after the commander in chief.
    </p>
<p>
      “I have the honor to present myself,” repeated Prince Andrew rather
      loudly, handing Kutúzov an envelope.
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!”
     </p>
<p>
      Kutúzov went out into the porch with Bagratión.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, good-by, Prince,” said he to Bagratión. “My blessing, and may
      Christ be with you in your great endeavor!”
     </p>
<p>
      His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his left
      hand he drew Bagratión toward him, and with his right, on which he wore a
      ring, he made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidently
      habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagratión kissed him on the neck
      instead.
    </p>
<p>
      “Christ be with you!” Kutúzov repeated and went toward his carriage. “Get
      in with me,” said he to Bolkónski.
    </p>
<p>
      “Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to remain with
      Prince Bagratión’s detachment.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Get in,” said Kutúzov, and noticing that Bolkónski still delayed, he
      added: “I need good officers myself, need them myself!”
     </p>
<p>
      They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.
    </p>
<p>
      “There is still much, much before us,” he said, as if with an old man’s
      penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkónski’s mind. “If a
      tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God,” he added as if
      speaking to himself.
    </p>
<p>
      Prince Andrew glanced at Kutúzov’s face only a foot distant from him and
      involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near his
      temple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the empty eye
      socket. “Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of those men’s death,”
       thought Bolkónski.
    </p>
<p>
      “That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment,” he said.
    </p>
<p>
      Kutúzov did not reply. He seemed to have forgotten what he had been
      saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently swaying on
      the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew. There was
      not a trace of agitation on his face. With delicate irony he questioned
      Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the Emperor, about
      the remarks he had heard at court concerning the Krems affair, and about
      some ladies they both knew.
    </p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
