<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 35</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-10" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-10-35" epub:type="chapter">
    			<h3>
      CHAPTER XXXV
    </h3>
<p>
      On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat
      Kutúzov, his gray head hanging, his heavy body relaxed. He gave no orders,
      but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, yes, do that,” he replied to various proposals. “Yes, yes: go, dear
      boy, and have a look,” he would say to one or another of those about him;
      or, “No, don’t, we’d better wait!” He listened to the reports that were
      brought him and gave directions when his subordinates demanded that of
      him; but when listening to the reports it seemed as if he were not
      interested in the import of the words spoken, but rather in something else—in
      the expression of face and tone of voice of those who were reporting. By
      long years of military experience he knew, and with the wisdom of age
      understood, that it is impossible for one man to direct hundreds of
      thousands of others struggling with death, and he knew that the result of
      a battle is decided not by the orders of a commander in chief, nor the
      place where the troops are stationed, nor by the number of cannon or of
      slaughtered men, but by that intangible force called the spirit of the
      army, and he watched this force and guided it in as far as that was in his
      power.
    </p>
<p>
      Kutúzov’s general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention, and
      his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master the
      fatigue of his old and feeble body.
    </p>
<p>
      At eleven o’clock they brought him news that the <i>flèches</i> captured by
      the French had been retaken, but that Prince Bagratión was wounded. Kutúzov
      groaned and swayed his head.
    </p>
<p>
      “Ride over to Prince Peter Ivánovich and find out about it exactly,” he
      said to one of his adjutants, and then turned to the Duke of Württemberg
      who was standing behind him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Will Your Highness please take command of the first army?”
     </p>
<p>
      Soon after the duke’s departure—before he could possibly have
      reached Semënovsk—his adjutant came back from him and told Kutúzov
      that the duke asked for more troops.
    </p>
<p>
      Kutúzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhtúrov to take over the
      command of the first army, and a request to the duke—whom he said he
      could not spare at such an important moment—to return to him. When
      they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and the staff
      officers congratulated him, Kutúzov smiled.
    </p>
<p>
      “Wait a little, gentlemen,” said he. “The battle is won, and there is
      nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat. Still, it is better to wait
      before we rejoice.”
     </p>
<p>
      But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army.
    </p>
<p>
      When Scherbínin came galloping from the left flank with news that the
      French had captured the <i>flèches</i> and the village of Semënovsk, Kutúzov,
      guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbínin’s looks that the
      news was bad, rose as if to stretch his legs and, taking Scherbínin’s arm,
      led him aside.
    </p>
<p>
      “Go, my dear fellow,” he said to Ermólov, “and see whether something can’t
      be done.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kutúzov was in Górki, near the center of the Russian position. The attack
      directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several times
      repulsed. In the center the French had not got beyond Borodinó, and on
      their left flank Uvárov’s cavalry had put the French to flight.
    </p>
<p>
      Toward three o’clock the French attacks ceased. On the faces of all who
      came from the field of battle, and of those who stood around him, Kutúzov
      noticed an expression of extreme tension. He was satisfied with the day’s
      success—a success exceeding his expectations, but the old man’s
      strength was failing him. Several times his head dropped low as if it were
      falling and he dozed off. Dinner was brought him.
    </p>
<p>
      Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Prince Andrew had
      said, “the war should be extended widely,” and whom Bagratión so detested,
      rode up while Kutúzov was at dinner. Wolzogen had come from Barclay de
      Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank. The
      sagacious Barclay de Tolly, seeing crowds of wounded men running back and
      the disordered rear of the army, weighed all the circumstances, concluded
      that the battle was lost, and sent his favorite officer to the commander
      in chief with that news.
    </p>
<p>
      Kutúzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and glanced
      at Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering lids.
    </p>
<p>
      Wolzogen, nonchalantly stretching his legs, approached Kutúzov with a
      half-contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the peak of his
      cap.
    </p>
<p>
      He treated his Serene Highness with a somewhat affected nonchalance
      intended to show that, as a highly trained military man, he left it to
      Russians to make an idol of this useless old man, but that he knew whom he
      was dealing with. <i>“Der alte Herr”</i> (as in their own set the
      Germans called Kutúzov) “is making himself very comfortable,” thought
      Wolzogen, and looking severely at the dishes in front of Kutúzov he began to report
      to “the old gentleman” the position of affairs on the left flank as
      Barclay had ordered him to and as he himself had seen and understood it.
    </p>
<p>
      “All the points of our position are in the enemy’s hands and we cannot
      dislodge them for lack of troops, the men are running away and it is
      impossible to stop them,” he reported.
    </p>
<p>
      Kutúzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen, as if not
      understanding what was said to him. Wolzogen, noticing “the old
      gentleman’s” agitation, said with a smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highness what
      I have seen. The troops are in complete disorder....”
     </p>
<p>
      “You have seen? You have seen?...” Kutúzov shouted. Frowning and rising
      quickly, he went up to Wolzogen.
    </p>
<p>
      “How... how dare you!...” he shouted, choking and making a threatening
      gesture with his trembling arms: “How dare you, sir, say that to <i>me?</i>
      You know nothing about it. Tell General Barclay from me that his information
      is incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to me,
      the commander in chief, than to him.”
     </p>
<p>
      Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder, but Kutúzov interrupted him.
    </p>
<p>
      “The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right flank.
      If you have seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to say what you don’t
      know! Be so good as to ride to General Barclay and inform him of my firm
      intention to attack the enemy tomorrow,” said Kutúzov sternly.
    </p>
<p>
      All were silent, and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing of the
      panting old general.
    </p>
<p>
      “They are repulsed everywhere, for which I thank God and our brave army!
      The enemy is beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred soil
      of Russia,” said Kutúzov crossing himself, and he suddenly sobbed as his
      eyes filled with tears.
    </p>
<p>
      Wolzogen, shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips, stepped silently
      aside, marveling at “the old gentleman’s” conceited stupidity.
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah, here he is, my hero!” said Kutúzov to a portly, handsome, dark-haired
      general who was just ascending the knoll.
    </p>
<p>
      This was Raévski, who had spent the whole day at the most important part
      of the field of Borodinó.
    </p>
<p>
      Raévski reported that the troops were firmly holding their ground and that
      the French no longer ventured to attack.
    </p>
<p>
      After hearing him, Kutúzov said in French:
    </p>
<p>
      “Then you do not think, <i>like some others</i>, that we must retreat?”
     </p>
<p>
      “On the contrary, your Highness, in indecisive actions it is always the
      most stubborn who remain victors,” replied Raévski, “and in my opinion...”
     </p>
<p>
      “Kaysárov!” Kutúzov called to his adjutant. “Sit down and write out the
      order of the day for tomorrow. And you,” he continued, addressing another,
      “ride along the line and announce that tomorrow we attack.”
     </p>
<p>
      While Kutúzov was talking to Raévski and dictating the order of the day,
      Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished to
      have written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given.
    </p>
<p>
      Kutúzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave directions for the order to be
      written out which the former commander in chief, to avoid personal
      responsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.
    </p>
<p>
      And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains
      throughout an army one and the same temper, known as “the spirit of the
      army,” and which constitutes the sinew of war, Kutúzov’s words, his order
      for a battle next day, immediately became known from one end of the army
      to the other.
    </p>
<p>
      It was far from being the same words or the same order that reached the
      farthest links of that chain. The tales passing from mouth to mouth at
      different ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutúzov had said,
      but the sense of his words spread everywhere because what he said was not
      the outcome of cunning calculations, but of a feeling that lay in the
      commander in chief’s soul as in that of every Russian.
    </p>
<p>
      And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy, and hearing
      from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe,
      the exhausted, wavering men felt comforted and inspirited.
    </p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
