<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-12" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-12-10" epub:type="chapter">
    			<h3>
      CHAPTER X
    </h3>
<p>
      On the eighth of September an officer—a very important one judging
      by the respect the guards showed him—entered the coach house where
      the prisoners were. This officer, probably someone on the staff, was
      holding a paper in his hand, and called over all the Russians there,
      naming Pierre as “the man who does not give his name.” Glancing indolently
      and indifferently at all the prisoners, he ordered the officer in charge
      to have them decently dressed and tidied up before taking them to the
      marshal. An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre with
      thirteen others was led to the Virgin’s Field. It was a fine day, sunny
      after rain, and the air was unusually pure. The smoke did not hang low as
      on the day when Pierre had been taken from the guardhouse on the Zúbovski
      rampart, but rose through the pure air in columns. No flames were seen,
      but columns of smoke rose on all sides, and all Moscow as far as Pierre
      could see was one vast charred ruin. On all sides there were waste spaces
      with only stoves and chimney stacks still standing, and here and there the
      blackened walls of some brick houses. Pierre gazed at the ruins and did
      not recognize districts he had known well. Here and there he could see
      churches that had not been burned. The Krémlin, which was not destroyed,
      gleamed white in the distance with its towers and the belfry of Iván the
      Great. The domes of the New Convent of the Virgin glittered brightly and
      its bells were ringing particularly clearly. These bells reminded Pierre
      that it was Sunday and the feast of the Nativity of the Virgin. But there
      seemed to be no one to celebrate this holiday: everywhere were blackened
      ruins, and the few Russians to be seen were tattered and frightened people
      who tried to hide when they saw the French.
    </p>
<p>
      It was plain that the Russian nest was ruined and destroyed, but in place
      of the Russian order of life that had been destroyed, Pierre unconsciously
      felt that a quite different, firm, French order had been established over
      this ruined nest. He felt this in the looks of the soldiers who, marching
      in regular ranks briskly and gaily, were escorting him and the other
      criminals; he felt it in the looks of an important French official in a
      carriage and pair driven by a soldier, whom they met on the way. He felt
      it in the merry sounds of regimental music he heard from the left side of
      the field, and felt and realized it especially from the list of prisoners
      the French officer had read out when he came that morning. Pierre had been
      taken by one set of soldiers and led first to one and then to another
      place with dozens of other men, and it seemed that they might have
      forgotten him, or confused him with the others. But no: the answers he had
      given when questioned had come back to him in his designation as “the man
      who does not give his name,” and under that appellation, which to Pierre
      seemed terrible, they were now leading him somewhere with unhesitating
      assurance on their faces that he and all the other prisoners were exactly
      the ones they wanted and that they were being taken to the proper place.
      Pierre felt himself to be an insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of
      a machine whose action he did not understand but which was working well.
    </p>
<p>
      He and the other prisoners were taken to the right side of the Virgin’s
      Field, to a large white house with an immense garden not far from the
      convent. This was Prince Shcherbátov’s house, where Pierre had often been
      in other days, and which, as he learned from the talk of the soldiers, was
      now occupied by the marshal, the Duke of Eckmühl (Davout).
    </p>
<p>
      They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one. Pierre
      was the sixth to enter. He was conducted through a glass gallery, an
      anteroom, and a hall, which were familiar to him, into a long low study at
      the door of which stood an adjutant.
    </p>
<p>
      Davout, spectacles on nose, sat bent over a table at the further end of
      the room. Pierre went close up to him, but Davout, evidently consulting a
      paper that lay before him, did not look up. Without raising his eyes, he
      said in a low voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Who are you?”
     </p>
<p>
      Pierre was silent because he was incapable of uttering a word. To him
      Davout was not merely a French general, but a man notorious for his
      cruelty. Looking at his cold face, as he sat like a stern schoolmaster who
      was prepared to wait awhile for an answer, Pierre felt that every instant
      of delay might cost him his life; but he did not know what to say. He did
      not venture to repeat what he had said at his first examination, yet to
      disclose his rank and position was dangerous and embarrassing. So he was
      silent. But before he had decided what to do, Davout raised his head,
      pushed his spectacles back on his forehead, screwed up his eyes, and
      looked intently at him.
    </p>
<p>
      “I know that man,” he said in a cold, measured tone, evidently calculated
      to frighten Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      The chill that had been running down Pierre’s back now seized his head as
      in a vise.
    </p>
<p>
      “You cannot know me, General, I have never seen you...”
     </p>
<p>
      “He is a Russian spy,” Davout interrupted, addressing another general who
      was present, but whom Pierre had not noticed.
    </p>
<p>
      Davout turned away. With an unexpected reverberation in his voice Pierre
      rapidly began:
    </p>
<p>
      “No, monseigneur,” he said, suddenly remembering that Davout was a duke.
      “No, monseigneur, you cannot have known me. I am a militia officer and
      have not quitted Moscow.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Your name?” asked Davout.
    </p>
<p>
      “Bezúkhov.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What proof have I that you are not lying?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Monseigneur!” exclaimed Pierre, not in an offended but in a pleading
      voice.
    </p>
<p>
      Davout looked up and gazed intently at him. For some seconds they looked
      at one another, and that look saved Pierre. Apart from conditions of war
      and law, that look established human relations between the two men. At
      that moment an immense number of things passed dimly through both their
      minds, and they realized that they were both children of humanity and were
      brothers.
    </p>
<p>
      At the first glance, when Davout had only raised his head from the papers
      where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierre was merely
      a circumstance, and Davout could have shot him without burdening his
      conscience with an evil deed, but now he saw in him a human being. He
      reflected for a moment.
    </p>
<p>
      “How can you show me that you are telling the truth?” said Davout coldly.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre remembered Ramballe, and named him and his regiment and the street
      where the house was.
    </p>
<p>
      “You are not what you say,” returned Davout.
    </p>
<p>
      In a trembling, faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs of the truth
      of his statements.
    </p>
<p>
      But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout.
    </p>
<p>
      Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought, and began buttoning
      up his uniform. It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his head in
      Pierre’s direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away. But where
      they were to take him Pierre did not know: back to the coach house or to
      the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as they
      crossed the Virgin’s Field.
    </p>
<p>
      He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting another question
      to Davout.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, of course!” replied Davout, but what this “yes” meant, Pierre did
      not know.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it was far, or
      in which direction. His faculties were quite numbed, he was stupefied, and
      noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the others did till
      they all stopped and he stopped too. The only thought in his mind at that
      time was: who was it that had really sentenced him to death? Not the men
      on the commission that had first examined him—not one of them wished
      to or, evidently, could have done it. It was not Davout, who had looked at
      him in so human a way. In another moment Davout would have realized that
      he was doing wrong, but just then the adjutant had come in and interrupted
      him. The adjutant, also, had evidently had no evil intent though he might
      have refrained from coming in. Then who was executing him, killing him,
      depriving him of life—him, Pierre, with all his memories,
      aspirations, hopes, and thoughts? Who was doing this? And Pierre felt that
      it was no one.
    </p>
<p>
      It was a system—a concurrence of circumstances.
    </p>
<p>
      A system of some sort was killing him—Pierre—depriving him of
      life, of everything, annihilating him.
    </p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
