<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3-2" id="chapter-3-2-37" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h4>
			<p>One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron, holding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his small bloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his head and looked about him, but above the level of the wounded men. He evidently wanted a little respite. After turning his head from right to left for some time, he sighed and looked down.</p>
			<p>“All right, immediately,” he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince Andréy out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.</p>
			<p>Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting.</p>
			<p>“It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a chance!” remarked one.</p>
			<p>Prince Andréy was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been cleared and which a dresser was washing down. Prince Andréy could not make out distinctly what was in that tent. The pitiful groans from all sides and the torturing pain in his thigh, stomach, and back distracted him. All he saw about him merged into a general impression of naked, bleeding human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent, as a few weeks previously, on that hot August day, such bodies had filled the dirty pond beside the Smolénsk road. Yes, it was the same flesh, the same <i xml:lang="fr">chair à canon</i>, the sight of which had even then filled him with horror, as by a presentiment.</p>
			<p>There were three operating tables in the tent. Two were occupied, and on the third they placed Prince Andréy. For a little while he was left alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other two tables. On the nearest one sat a Tartar, probably a Cossack, judging by the uniform thrown down beside him. Four soldiers were holding him, and a spectacled doctor was cutting into his muscular brown back.</p>
			<p>“Ooh, ooh, ooh!” grunted the Tartar, and suddenly lifting up his swarthy snub-nosed face with its high cheekbones, and baring his white teeth, he began to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing, ringing, and prolonged yells. On the other table, round which many people were crowding, a tall well-fed man lay on his back with his head thrown back. His curly hair, its color, and the shape of his head seemed strangely familiar to Prince Andréy. Several dressers were pressing on his chest to hold him down. One large, white, plump leg twitched rapidly all the time with a feverish tremor. The man was sobbing and choking convulsively. Two doctors⁠—one of whom was pale and trembling⁠—were silently doing something to this man’s other, gory leg. When he had finished with the Tartar, whom they covered with an overcoat, the spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andréy, wiping his hands.</p>
			<p>He glanced at Prince Andréy’s face and quickly turned away.</p>
			<p>“Undress him! What are you waiting for?” he cried angrily to the dressers.</p>
			<p>His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince Andréy’s mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily to undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him. The doctor bent down over the wound, felt it, and sighed deeply. Then he made a sign to someone, and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andréy to lose consciousness. When he came to himself the splintered portions of his thighbone had been extracted, the torn flesh cut away, and the wound bandaged. Water was being sprinkled on his face. As soon as Prince Andréy opened his eyes, the doctor bent over, kissed him silently on the lips, and hurried away.</p>
			<p>After the sufferings he had been enduring, Prince Andréy enjoyed a blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time. All the best and happiest moments of his life⁠—especially his earliest childhood, when he used to be undressed and put to bed, and when leaning over him his nurse sang him to sleep and he, burying his head in the pillow, felt happy in the mere consciousness of life⁠—returned to his memory, not merely as something past but as something present.</p>
			<p>The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whose head seemed familiar to Prince Andréy: they were lifting him up and trying to quiet him.</p>
			<p>“Show it to me.⁠ ⁠… Oh, ooh⁠ ⁠… Oh! Oh, ooh!” his frightened moans could be heard, subdued by suffering and broken by sobs.</p>
			<p>Hearing those moans Prince Andréy wanted to weep. Whether because he was dying without glory, or because he was sorry to part with life, or because of those memories of a childhood that could not return, or because he was suffering and others were suffering and that man near him was groaning so piteously⁠—he felt like weeping childlike, kindly, and almost happy tears.</p>
			<p>The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted blood and with the boot still on.</p>
			<p>“Oh! Oh, ooh!” he sobbed, like a woman.</p>
			<p>The doctor who had been standing beside him, preventing Prince Andréy from seeing his face, moved away.</p>
			<p>“My God! What is this? Why is he here?” said Prince Andréy to himself.</p>
			<p>In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man whose leg had just been amputated, he recognized Anatole Kurágin. Men were supporting him in their arms and offering him a glass of water, but his trembling, swollen lips could not grasp its rim. Anatole was sobbing painfully. “Yes, it is he! Yes, that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me,” thought Prince Andréy, not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him. “What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life?” he asked himself without finding an answer. And suddenly a new unexpected memory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself to him. He remembered Natásha as he had seen her for the first time at the ball in 1810, with her slender neck and arms and with a frightened happy face ready for rapture, and love and tenderness for her, stronger and more vivid than ever, awoke in his soul. He now remembered the connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes. He remembered everything, and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy heart.</p>
			<p>Prince Andréy could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving tears for his fellow men, for himself, and for his own and their errors.</p>
			<p>“Compassion, love of our brothers, for those who love us and for those who hate us, love of our enemies; yes, that love which God preached on earth and which Princess Márya taught me and I did not understand⁠—that is what made me sorry to part with life, that is what remained for me had I lived. But now it is too late. I know it!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
