<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2-1" id="chapter-2-1-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h4>
			<p>It was long since RostГіv had felt such enjoyment from music as he did that day. But no sooner had NatГЎsha finished her barcarolle than reality again presented itself. He got up without saying a word and went downstairs to his own room. A quarter of an hour later the old count came in from his club, cheerful and contented. NikolГЎy, hearing him drive up, went to meet him.</p>
			<p>вҖңWellвҒ вҖ”had a good time?вҖқ said the old count, smiling gaily and proudly at his son.</p>
			<p>NikolГЎy tried to say вҖңYes,вҖқ but could not: and he nearly burst into sobs. The count was lighting his pipe and did not notice his sonвҖҷs condition.</p>
			<p>вҖңAh, it canвҖҷt be avoided!вҖқ thought NikolГЎy, for the first and last time. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, which made him feel ashamed of himself, he said, as if merely asking his father to let him have the carriage to drive to town:</p>
			<p>вҖңPapa, I have come on a matter of business. I was nearly forgetting. I need some money.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңDear me!вҖқ said his father, who was in a specially good humor. вҖңI told you it would not be enough. How much?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңVery much,вҖқ said NikolГЎy flushing, and with a stupid careless smile, for which he was long unable to forgive himself, вҖңI have lost a little, I mean a good deal, a great dealвҒ вҖ”forty three thousand.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat! To whom?вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Nonsense!вҖқ cried the count, suddenly reddening with an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do.</p>
			<p>вҖңI promised to pay tomorrow,вҖқ said NikolГЎy.</p>
			<p>вҖңWell!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ said the old count, spreading out his arms and sinking helplessly on the sofa.</p>
			<p>вҖңIt canвҖҷt be helped! It happens to everyone!вҖқ said the son, with a bold, free, and easy tone, while in his soul he regarded himself as a worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for his crime. He longed to kiss his fatherвҖҷs hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness, but said, in a careless and even rude voice, that it happens to everyone!</p>
			<p>The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his sonвҖҷs words and began bustlingly searching for something.</p>
			<p>вҖңYes, yes,вҖқ he muttered, вҖңit will be difficult, I fear, difficult to raiseвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?вҖқ</p>
			<p>And with a furtive glance at his sonвҖҷs face, the count went out of the room.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ NikolГЎy had been prepared for resistance, but had not at all expected this.</p>
			<p>вҖңPapa! Papa!вҖқ he called after him, sobbing, вҖңforgive me!вҖқ And seizing his fatherвҖҷs hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst into tears.</p>
			<p>While father and son were having their explanation, the mother and daughter were having one not less important. NatГЎsha came running to her mother, quite excited.</p>
			<p>вҖңMamma!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Mamma!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ He has made meвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңMade what?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңMade, made me an offer, Mamma! Mamma!вҖқ she exclaimed.</p>
			<p>The countess did not believe her ears. DenГӯsov had proposed. To whom? To this chit of a girl, NatГЎsha, who not so long ago was playing with dolls and who was still having lessons.</p>
			<p>вҖңDonвҖҷt, NatГЎsha! What nonsense!вҖқ she said, hoping it was a joke.</p>
			<p>вҖңNonsense, indeed! I am telling you the fact,вҖқ said NatГЎsha indignantly. вҖңI come to ask you what to do, and you call it вҖҳnonsense!вҖҷвҖҠвҖқ</p>
			<p>The countess shrugged her shoulders.</p>
			<p>вҖңIf it is true that Monsieur DenГӯsov has made you a proposal, tell him he is a fool, thatвҖҷs all!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, heвҖҷs not a fool!вҖқ replied NatГЎsha indignantly and seriously.</p>
			<p>вҖңWell then, what do you want? YouвҖҷre all in love nowadays. Well, if you are in love, marry him!вҖқ said the countess, with a laugh of annoyance. вҖңGood luck to you!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, Mamma, IвҖҷm not in love with him, I suppose IвҖҷm not in love with him.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWell then, tell him so.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңMamma, are you cross? DonвҖҷt be cross, dear! Is it my fault?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and tell him?вҖқ said the countess smiling.</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, I will do it myself, only tell me what to say. ItвҖҷs all very well for you,вҖқ said NatГЎsha, with a responsive smile. вҖңYou should have seen how he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came out accidently.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWell, all the same, you must refuse him.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, I mustnвҖҷt. I am so sorry for him! HeвҖҷs so nice.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWell then, accept his offer. ItвҖҷs high time for you to be married,вҖқ answered the countess sharply and sarcastically.</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, Mamma, but IвҖҷm so sorry for him. I donвҖҷt know how IвҖҷm to say it.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd thereвҖҷs nothing for you to say. I shall speak to him myself,вҖқ said the countess, indignant that they should have dared to treat this little NatГЎsha as grown up.</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and youвҖҷll listen at the door,вҖқ and NatГЎsha ran across the drawing room to the dancing hall, where DenГӯsov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichord with his face in his hands.</p>
			<p>He jumped up at the sound of her light step.</p>
			<p>вҖңNatГЎli,вҖқ he said, moving with rapid steps toward her, вҖңdecide my fate. It is in your hands.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңVasГӯli DmГӯtrich, IвҖҷm so sorry for you!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ No, but you are so niceвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ but it wonвҖҷt doвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ not thatвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ but as a friend, I shall always love you.вҖқ</p>
			<p>DenГӯsov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did not understand. She kissed his rough curly black head. At this instant, they heard the quick rustle of the countessвҖҷ dress. She came up to them.</p>
			<p>вҖңVasГӯli DmГӯtrich, I thank you for the honor,вҖқ she said, with an embarrassed voice, though it sounded severe to DenГӯsovвҒ вҖ”вҖңbut my daughter is so young, and I thought that, as my sonвҖҷs friend, you would have addressed yourself first to me. In that case you would not have obliged me to give this refusal.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңCountessвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ said DenГӯsov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face. He tried to say more, but faltered.</p>
			<p>NatГЎsha could not remain calm, seeing him in such a plight. She began to sob aloud.</p>
			<p>вҖңCountess, I have done wвҖҷong,вҖқ DenГӯsov went on in an unsteady voice, вҖңbut believe me, I so adore your daughter and all your family that I would give my life twice overвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ He looked at the countess, and seeing her severe face said: вҖңWell, goodbye, Countess,вҖқ and kissing her hand, he left the room with quick resolute strides, without looking at NatГЎsha.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Next day RostГіv saw DenГӯsov off. He did not wish to stay another day in Moscow. All DenГӯsovвҖҷs Moscow friends gave him a farewell entertainment at the gypsiesвҖҷ, with the result that he had no recollection of how he was put in the sleigh or of the first three stages of his journey.</p>
			<p>After DenГӯsovвҖҷs departure, RostГіv spent another fortnight in Moscow, without going out of the house, waiting for the money his father could not at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the girlsвҖҷ room.</p>
			<p>SГіnya was more tender and devoted to him than ever. It was as if she wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her love him all the more, but NikolГЎy now considered himself unworthy of her.</p>
			<p>He filled the girlsвҖҷ albums with verses and music, and having at last sent DГіlokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received his receipt, he left at the end of November, without taking leave of any of his acquaintances, to overtake his regiment which was already in Poland.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
