<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
    			<h3>
      CHAPTER IV
    </h3>
<p>
      Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew
      Bolkónski, the little princess’ husband. He was a very handsome young man,
      of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything about him, from
      his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step, offered a most
      striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was evident that he not
      only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had found them to be so
      tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to them. And among all
      these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed to bore him so much as
      that of his pretty wife. He turned away from her with a grimace that
      distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna Pávlovna’s hand, and screwing up
      his eyes scanned the whole company.
    </p>
<p>
      “You are off to the war, Prince?” said Anna Pávlovna.
    </p>
<p>
      “General Kutúzov,” said Bolkónski, speaking French and stressing the last
      syllable of the general’s name like a Frenchman, “has been pleased to take
      me as an aide-de-camp....”
     </p>
<p>
      “And Lise, your wife?”
     </p>
<p>
      “She will go to the country.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?”
     </p>
<p>
<i>“André,”</i> said his wife, addressing her husband in the same
      coquettish manner in which she spoke to other men, “the vicomte has been
      telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!”
     </p>
<p>
      Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from the
      moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
      affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked round
      Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
      touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre’s beaming face he gave him an
      unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
    </p>
<p>
      “There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?” said he to Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      “I knew you would be here,” replied Pierre. “I will come to supper with
      you. May I?” he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte who
      was continuing his story.
    </p>
<p>
      “No, impossible!” said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre’s hand
      to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished to say
      something more, but at that moment Prince Vasíli and his daughter got up
      to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
    </p>
<p>
      “You must excuse me, dear Vicomte,” said Prince Vasíli to the Frenchman,
      holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising.
      “This unfortunate fete at the ambassador’s deprives me of a pleasure, and
      obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave your enchanting
      party,” said he, turning to Anna Pávlovna.
    </p>
<p>
      His daughter, Princess Hélène, passed between the chairs, lightly holding
      up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more radiantly on her
      beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous, almost frightened,
      eyes as she passed him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Very lovely,” said Prince Andrew.
    </p>
<p>
      “Very,” said Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      In passing Prince Vasíli seized Pierre’s hand and said to Anna Pávlovna:
      “Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a whole month and
      this is the first time I have seen him in society. Nothing is so necessary
      for a young man as the society of clever women.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
      Anna Pávlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his
      father to be a connection of Prince Vasíli’s. The elderly lady who had
      been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasíli
      in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed had left
      her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety and fear.
    </p>
<p>
      “How about my son Borís, Prince?” said she, hurrying after him into the
      anteroom. “I can’t remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what news I
      may take back to my poor boy.”
     </p>
<p>
      Although Prince Vasíli listened reluctantly and not very politely to the
      elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an ingratiating
      and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go away.
    </p>
<p>
      “What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he would be
      transferred to the Guards at once?” said she.
    </p>
<p>
      “Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can,” answered Prince
      Vasíli, “but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should advise
      you to appeal to Rumyántsev through Prince Golítsyn. That would be the
      best way.”
     </p>
<p>
      The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskáya, belonging to one of the best
      families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of society
      had lost her former influential connections. She had now come to
      Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son. It
      was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasíli that she had obtained an
      invitation to Anna Pávlovna’s reception and had sat listening to the
      vicomte’s story. Prince Vasíli’s words frightened her, an embittered look
      clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment; then she smiled
      again and clutched Prince Vasíli’s arm more tightly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Listen to me, Prince,” said she. “I have never yet asked you for anything
      and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my father’s
      friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God’s sake to do this for my
      son—and I shall always regard you as a benefactor,” she added
      hurriedly. “No, don’t be angry, but promise! I have asked Golítsyn and he
      has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were,” she said, trying to
      smile though tears were in her eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      “Papa, we shall be late,” said Princess Hélène, turning her beautiful head
      and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stood waiting by
      the door.
    </p>
<p>
      Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized if
      it is to last. Prince Vasíli knew this, and having once realized that if
      he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be unable to
      ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But in Princess
      Drubetskáya’s case he felt, after her second appeal, something like qualms
      of conscience. She had reminded him of what was quite true; he had been
      indebted to her father for the first steps in his career. Moreover, he
      could see by her manners that she was one of those women—mostly
      mothers—who, having once made up their minds, will not rest until
      they have gained their end, and are prepared if necessary to go on
      insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even to make scenes. This
      last consideration moved him.
    </p>
<p>
      “My dear Anna Mikháylovna,” said he with his usual familiarity and
      weariness of tone, “it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask; but
      to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father’s memory, I will
      do the impossible—your son shall be transferred to the Guards. Here
      is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?”
     </p>
<p>
      “My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you—I knew your
      kindness!” He turned to go.
    </p>
<p>
      “Wait—just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards...”
       she faltered. “You are on good terms with Michael Ilariónovich Kutúzov ...
      recommend Borís to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, and then...”
     </p>
<p>
      Prince Vasíli smiled.
    </p>
<p>
      “No, I won’t promise that. You don’t know how Kutúzov is pestered since
      his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all the
      Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants.”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, but do promise! I won’t let you go! My dear benefactor...”
     </p>
<p>
      “Papa,” said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, “we shall
      be late.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, <i>au revoir!</i> Good-by! You hear her?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Certainly; but about Kutúzov, I don’t promise.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Do promise, do promise, Vasíli!” cried Anna Mikháylovna as he went, with
      the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came naturally
      to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
    </p>
<p>
      Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed all
      the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her face resumed
      its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the group where
      the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to listen, while
      waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was accomplished.
    </p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
