<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 31</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-10" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-10-31" epub:type="chapter">
    			<h3>
      CHAPTER XXXI
    </h3>
<p>
      Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was galloping
      turned sharply to the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him, galloped in
      among some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him. He tried to pass
      either in front of them or to the right or left, but there were soldiers
      everywhere, all with the same preoccupied expression and busy with some
      unseen but evidently important task. They all gazed with the same
      dissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a white hat,
      who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse’s
      hoofs.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why ride into the middle of the battalion?” one of them shouted at him.
    </p>
<p>
      Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and Pierre,
      bending over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shying horse,
      galloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space.
    </p>
<p>
      There was a bridge ahead of him, where other soldiers stood firing. Pierre
      rode up to them. Without being aware of it he had come to the bridge
      across the Kolochá between Górki and Borodinó, which the French (having
      occupied Borodinó) were attacking in the first phase of the battle. Pierre
      saw that there was a bridge in front of him and that soldiers were doing
      something on both sides of it and in the meadow, among the rows of
      new-mown hay which he had taken no notice of amid the smoke of the
      campfires the day before; but despite the incessant firing going on there
      he had no idea that this was the field of battle. He did not notice the
      sound of the bullets whistling from every side, or the projectiles that
      flew over him, did not see the enemy on the other side of the river, and
      for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded, though many fell
      near him. He looked about him with a smile which did not leave his face.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why’s that fellow in front of the line?” shouted somebody at him again.
    </p>
<p>
      “To the left!... Keep to the right!” the men shouted to him.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly encountered one of Raévski’s
      adjutants whom he knew. The adjutant looked angrily at him, evidently also
      intending to shout at him, but on recognizing him he nodded.
    </p>
<p>
      “How have you got here?” he said, and galloped on.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre, feeling out of place there, having nothing to do, and afraid of
      getting in someone’s way again, galloped after the adjutant.
    </p>
<p>
      “What’s happening here? May I come with you?” he asked.
    </p>
<p>
      “One moment, one moment!” replied the adjutant, and riding up to a stout
      colonel who was standing in the meadow, he gave him some message and then
      addressed Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why have you come here, Count?” he asked with a smile. “Still
      inquisitive?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, yes,” assented Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.
    </p>
<p>
      “Here it’s tolerable,” said he, “but with Bagratión on the left flank
      they’re getting it frightfully hot.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Really?” said Pierre. “Where is that?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Come along with me to our knoll. We can get a view from there and in our
      battery it is still bearable,” said the adjutant. “Will you come?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, I’ll come with you,” replied Pierre, looking round for his groom.
    </p>
<p>
      It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or being
      carried on stretchers. On that very meadow he had ridden over the day
      before, a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay, with his head
      thrown awkwardly back and his shako off.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why haven’t they carried him away?” Pierre was about to ask, but seeing
      the stern expression of the adjutant who was also looking that way, he
      checked himself.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the adjutant
      to Raévski’s Redoubt. His horse lagged behind the adjutant’s and jolted
      him at every step.
    </p>
<p>
      “You don’t seem to be used to riding, Count?” remarked the adjutant.
    </p>
<p>
      “No it’s not that, but her action seems so jerky,” said Pierre in a
      puzzled tone.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why... she’s wounded!” said the adjutant. “In the off foreleg above the
      knee. A bullet, no doubt. I congratulate you, Count, on your baptism of
      fire!”
     </p>
<p>
      Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind the artillery
      which had been moved forward and was in action, deafening them with the
      noise of firing, they came to a small wood. There it was cool and quiet,
      with a scent of autumn. Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up
      the hill on foot.
    </p>
<p>
      “Is the general here?” asked the adjutant on reaching the knoll.
    </p>
<p>
      “He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way,” someone told him,
      pointing to the right.
    </p>
<p>
      The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t trouble about me,” said Pierre. “I’ll go up onto the knoll if I
      may?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, do. You’ll see everything from there and it’s less dangerous, and
      I’ll come for you.”
     </p>
<p>
      Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on. They did not meet
      again, and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm that day.
    </p>
<p>
      The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwards known to
      the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raévski’s Redoubt, and to the French
      as <i>la grande redoute, la fatale redoute, la redoute du centre</i>, around
      which tens of thousands fell, and which the French regarded as the key to
      the whole position.
    </p>
<p>
      This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches had
      been dug. Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being fired
      through openings in the earthwork.
    </p>
<p>
      In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also fired
      incessantly. A little behind the guns stood infantry. When ascending that
      knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot, on which small trenches had
      been dug and from which a few guns were firing, was the most important
      point of the battle.
    </p>
<p>
      On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thought it one of
      the least significant parts of the field.
    </p>
<p>
      Having reached the knoll, Pierre sat down at one end of a trench
      surrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with an
      unconsciously happy smile. Occasionally he rose and walked about the
      battery still with that same smile, trying not to obstruct the soldiers
      who were loading, hauling the guns, and continually running past him with
      bags and charges. The guns of that battery were being fired continually
      one after another with a deafening roar, enveloping the whole neighborhood
      in powder smoke.
    </p>
<p>
      In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support, here
      in the battery where a small number of men busy at their work were
      separated from the rest by a trench, everyone experienced a common and as
      it were family feeling of animation.
    </p>
<p>
      The intrusion of Pierre’s nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an
      unpleasant impression at first. The soldiers looked askance at him with
      surprise and even alarm as they went past him. The senior artillery
      officer, a tall, long-legged, pockmarked man, moved over to Pierre as if
      to see the action of the farthest gun and looked at him with curiosity.
    </p>
<p>
      A young round-faced officer, quite a boy still and evidently only just out
      of the Cadet College, who was zealously commanding the two guns entrusted
      to him, addressed Pierre sternly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Sir,” he said, “permit me to ask you to stand aside. You must not be
      here.”
     </p>
<p>
      The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre.
      But when they had convinced themselves that this man in the white hat was
      doing no harm, but either sat quietly on the slope of the trench with a
      shy smile or, politely making way for the soldiers, paced up and down the
      battery under fire as calmly as if he were on a boulevard, their feeling
      of hostile distrust gradually began to change into a kindly and bantering
      sympathy, such as soldiers feel for their dogs, cocks, goats, and in
      general for the animals that live with the regiment. The men soon accepted
      Pierre into their family, adopted him, gave him a nickname (“our
      gentleman”), and made kindly fun of him among themselves.
    </p>
<p>
      A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked around with
      a smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrown up.
    </p>
<p>
      “And how’s it you’re not afraid, sir, really now?” a red-faced,
      broad-shouldered soldier asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed a set of
      sound, white teeth.
    </p>
<p>
      “Are you afraid, then?” said Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      “What else do you expect?” answered the soldier. “She has no mercy, you
      know! When she comes spluttering down, out go your innards. One can’t help
      being afraid,” he said laughing.
    </p>
<p>
      Several of the men, with bright kindly faces, stopped beside Pierre. They
      seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else, and the
      discovery that he did so delighted them.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s the business of us soldiers. But in a gentleman it’s wonderful!
      There’s a gentleman for you!”
     </p>
<p>
      “To your places!” cried the young officer to the men gathered round
      Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for the first or
      second time and therefore treated both his superiors and the men with
      great precision and formality.
    </p>
<p>
      The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growing more
      intense over the whole field, especially to the left where Bagratión’s
      <i>flèches</i> were, but where Pierre was the smoke of the firing made it almost
      impossible to distinguish anything. Moreover, his whole attention was
      engrossed by watching the family circle—separated from all else—formed
      by the men in the battery. His first unconscious feeling of joyful
      animation produced by the sights and sounds of the battlefield was now
      replaced by another, especially since he had seen that soldier lying alone
      in the hayfield. Now, seated on the slope of the trench, he observed the
      faces of those around him.
    </p>
<p>
      By ten o’clock some twenty men had already been carried away from the
      battery; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and more
      frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around.
      But the men in the battery seemed not to notice this, and merry voices and
      jokes were heard on all sides.
    </p>
<p>
      “A live one!” shouted a man as a whistling shell approached.
    </p>
<p>
      “Not this way! To the infantry!” added another with loud laughter, seeing
      the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports.
    </p>
<p>
      “Are you bowing to a friend, eh?” remarked another, chaffing a peasant who
      ducked low as a cannon ball flew over.
    </p>
<p>
      Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench, looking out to see
      what was happening in front.
    </p>
<p>
      “They’ve withdrawn the front line, it has retired,” said they, pointing
      over the earthwork.
    </p>
<p>
      “Mind your own business,” an old sergeant shouted at them. “If they’ve
      retired it’s because there’s work for them to do farther back.”
     </p>
<p>
      And the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him a shove
      with his knee. This was followed by a burst of laughter.
    </p>
<p>
      “To the fifth gun, wheel it up!” came shouts from one side.
    </p>
<p>
      “Now then, all together, like bargees!” rose the merry voices of those who
      were moving the gun.
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, she nearly knocked our gentleman’s hat off!” cried the red-faced
      humorist, showing his teeth chaffing Pierre. “Awkward baggage!” he added
      reproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannon wheel and a man’s leg.
    </p>
<p>
      “Now then, you foxes!” said another, laughing at some militiamen who,
      stooping low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man.
    </p>
<p>
      “So this gruel isn’t to your taste? Oh, you crows! You’re scared!” they
      shouted at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the man whose leg
      had been torn off.
    </p>
<p>
      “There, lads... oh, oh!” they mimicked the peasants, “they don’t like it
      at all!”
     </p>
<p>
      Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and after every
      loss, the liveliness increased more and more.
    </p>
<p>
      As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly and
      rapidly from an approaching thundercloud, so, as if in opposition to what
      was taking place, the lightning of hidden fire growing more and more
      intense glowed in the faces of these men.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to know
      what was happening there; he was entirely absorbed in watching this fire
      which burned ever more brightly and which he felt was flaming up in the
      same way in his own soul.
    </p>
<p>
      At ten o’clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front of the
      battery and along the Kámenka streamlet retreated. From the battery they
      could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on their
      muskets. A general with his suite came to the battery, and after speaking
      to the colonel gave Pierre an angry look and went away again having
      ordered the infantry supports behind the battery to lie down, so as to be
      less exposed to fire. After this from amid the ranks of infantry to the
      right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts of command, and
      from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantry moved forward.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck by a
      pale young officer who, letting his sword hang down, was walking backwards
      and kept glancing uneasily around.
    </p>
<p>
      The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their long-drawn
      shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard. A few minutes later
      crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back from that direction.
      Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in the battery. Several
      men were lying about who had not been removed. Around the cannon the men
      moved still more briskly and busily. No one any longer took notice of
      Pierre. Once or twice he was shouted at for being in the way. The senior
      officer moved with big, rapid strides from one gun to another with a
      frowning face. The young officer, with his face still more flushed,
      commanded the men more scrupulously than ever. The soldiers handed up the
      charges, turned, loaded, and did their business with strained smartness.
      They gave little jumps as they walked, as though they were on springs.
    </p>
<p>
      The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the fire which Pierre
      had watched kindle burned up brightly. Pierre standing beside the
      commanding officer. The young officer, his hand to his shako, ran up to
      his superior.
    </p>
<p>
      “I have the honor to report, sir, that only eight rounds are left. Are we
      to continue firing?” he asked.
    </p>
<p>
      “Grapeshot!” the senior shouted, without answering the question, looking
      over the wall of the trench.
    </p>
<p>
      Suddenly something happened: the young officer gave a gasp and bending
      double sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing. Everything
      became strange, confused, and misty in Pierre’s eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork, a
      soldier, or a gun. Pierre, who had not noticed these sounds before, now
      heard nothing else. On the right of the battery soldiers shouting
      “Hurrah!” were running not forwards but backwards, it seemed to Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which he was
      standing, crumbling down the earth; a black ball flashed before his eyes
      and at the same instant plumped into something. Some militiamen who were
      entering the battery ran back.
    </p>
<p>
      “All with grapeshot!” shouted the officer.
    </p>
<p>
      The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informed
      him (as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more of
      some wine asked for) that there were no more charges.
    </p>
<p>
      “The scoundrels! What are they doing?” shouted the officer, turning to
      Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      The officer’s face was red and perspiring and his eyes glittered under his
      frowning brow.
    </p>
<p>
      “Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes!” he yelled,
      angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ll go,” said Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      The officer, without answering him, strode across to the opposite side.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t fire.... Wait!” he shouted.
    </p>
<p>
      The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled against Pierre.
    </p>
<p>
      “Eh, sir, this is no place for you,” said he, and ran down the slope.
    </p>
<p>
      Pierre ran after him, avoiding the spot where the young officer was
      sitting.
    </p>
<p>
      One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, falling in front,
      beside, and behind him. Pierre ran down the slope. “Where am I going?” he
      suddenly asked himself when he was already near the green ammunition
      wagons. He halted irresolutely, not knowing whether to return or go on.
      Suddenly a terrible concussion threw him backwards to the ground. At the
      same instant he was dazzled by a great flash of flame, and immediately a
      deafening roar, crackling, and whistling made his ears tingle.
    </p>
<p>
      When he came to himself he was sitting on the ground leaning on his hands;
      the ammunition wagons he had been approaching no longer existed, only
      charred green boards and rags littered the scorched grass, and a horse,
      dangling fragments of its shaft behind it, galloped past, while another
      horse lay, like Pierre, on the ground, uttering prolonged and piercing
      cries.
    </p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
