<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dramatis Personae</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dramatis Personae</h2>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>The <b>Bezúkhovs</b></p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Count Kiríl Vladímirovich Bezúkhov, a wealthy old grandee of the Empress Catherine’s time. At his death his illegimate son Pierre inherits his title and estates.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Monsieur Pierre (20; all ages as of 1805), afterwards Count Pyotr Kirílych Bezúkhov. The Count’s illegitimate son, educated abroad, and easily led both into dissipation and into idealistic theories of life. He marries first the Princess Elèn, and afterwards the Countess Natásha Rostóva.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The <b>Bolkónskis</b></p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Prince Nikoláy Andréevich Bolkónski. A harsh martinet, full of old-time prejudices, living a bitter, lonely life at his estate of Bald Hills; father of Prince Andréy and Princess Márya.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Prince Andréy Nikoláevich Bolkónski (28); also called André and Andrúsha. Adjutant or aide to General Kutúzov; wounded at Austerlitz; proprietor of Boguchárovo; engaged to Countess Natásha Rostóva after his wife dies.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Princess Lizaveta Bolkónskaya (née Mienen); known as Lise/Liza. Prince Andréy’s wife, “the most fascinating woman in Petersburg,” who dies giving birth to their son.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Prince Nikoláy Andréevich Bolkónski; also called Nikolúshka, Koko, Nikolínka. Prince Andréy’s baby son.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Princess Márya Nikoláevna Bolkónskaya; also called Marie. Marries Nikoláy Rostóv and becomes the Countess Rostóva.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<b>The Drubetskóys</b>
					</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Prince Borís Drubetskóy. A relation of the Rostóvs; he is cold, calculating, and selfish, and through influence is rapidly advanced.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Julie Drubetskáya (21), née Karágina. Marries Borís’.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Princess Anna Mikháylovna Drubetskáya. Poor but intriguing; Borís’ mother.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<b>The Kurágins</b>
					</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Prince Vasíli Sergéevich Kurágin; also called Basile. Close relative of Count Kiríl Bezúkhov.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Prince Ippolit Kurágin. Prince Vasíli’s older son; in the diplomatic service, but dissipated and foolish.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Prince Anatole Kurágin. Prince Vasíli’s younger son; a spendthrift who aspires to Princess Márya Nikoláevna’s hand, but proves himself unworthy.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Princess Elèn Vasílievna Kurágina; also called Elèna. Prince Vasíli’s daughter, afterwards the unfaithful first wife of Pierre Bezúkhov.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<b>The Rostóvs</b>
					</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Count Ilyá Andréevich Rostóv. A wealthy but extravagant proprietor whose affairs go from bad to worse.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Countess Natálya Rostóva (née Shinshiná), his wife.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Count Nikoláy Ilyítch Rostóv (20). Count Rostóv’s eldest son, open-hearted, gallant, generous; serving in the cavalry; at first engaged to his cousin Sónya, afterwards married to the Princess Márya Bolkónskaya.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Count Pyotr Ilýnich Rostóv (9); also called Pétya. Count Rostóv’s youngest son.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Countess Véra Rostóva (19). Count Rostóv’s oldest daughter; later married to Alphonse Berg.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Countess Natálya Ilyníchna Rostóva (13); also called Natásha. Count Rostóv’s youngest daughter; engaged to Prince Andréy Bolkónski, but later married to Count Pierre Bezukhóv.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Sónya (15). Count Rostóv’s niece; engaged for a time to Count Nikoláy.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<b>Others</b>
					</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Márya Dmítrievna Akhrosímova.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Osip Alexéevich Bazdéev. The Freemason, Pierre’s “Benefactor.”</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Alphonse Kárlovich Berg. A conceited young officer who “gets on” and marries Countess Véra Rostóva.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Vasíli Fëdorovich Denísov. Also called Váska; gallant soldier and poet, in love with Natásha Rostóva.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Fédya Dólokhov (25). A gambler and roué, who offers himself to Sónya but is rejected; brave but bad.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Márya Ivánovna Dólokhova. The fond mother of Dólokhov.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Mikháil Ivánovich. Prince Nikoláy Bolkónski’s live-in architect.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>General Mikháil Ilariónovich Kutúzov. Real-life commander-in-chief of the Russian army during Napoleon’s invasion.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Anna Pávlovna Schérer (40). Maid-of-honour to and favorite of the dowager empress Márya Fëderovna.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
